

======================================================================
=== SOURCE: MNM-003.pdf ===
======================================================================

MNM-003
Indira Gandhi National Open University
School of Computer and Information Sciences
DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY
& VIDEOGRAPHY
Indira Gandhi National Open University

EXPERTS COMMITTEE
& Videography Prof. Shambhu Nath Singh (Chairperson) Former Prof. Kiron Bansal, Professor, SOJNMS,
Vice Chancellor, Patna University Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
IGNOU
Prof. Iftekhar Ahmed Dr. O. P. Dewal,
Former Director, AJKMCRC, Jamia Milia Islamia, Associate Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
New Delhi
Prof. C. P. Singh Dr. K.S. Arul Selvan,
GGS Indraprastha University, New Delhi Associate Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
Prof. Anand Pradhan Dr. Shikha Rai,
Indian Institute of Mass Communication, New Delhi Assistant Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
Mr. K. Ravikanth Dr. Ramesh Yadav,
Former Director, EMPC, IGNOU Assistant Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
Dr. Amit Kumar Ms. Padmini Jain,
(Convener) Assistant Professor, Assistant Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
SOJNMS, IGNOU
PROGRAMME COORDINATOR: Dr. Amit Kumar
COURSE EDITOR AND COORDINATOR: Dr. Amit Kumar
BLOCK 1 PREPERATION TEAM
Unit 1 Prof. Gauri D Chakraborty Unit 2 Adopted from Unit-6, Block Editor and
Professor, Times School of MJM-027 Coordinator:
Media, Bennett University Dr. Amit Kumar
Assistant Professor,
Unit 3 Adapted from Unit-12, Unit 4 Dr. Amit Kumar
SOJNMS, IGNOU
MJM-027 and Revised Assistant Professor,
by Dr. Amit Kumar, SOJNMS, IGNOU
SOJNMS,IGNOU & Dr. Poonam Gaur,
Assistant Professor,
ASCO, Amity
University, NOIDA
BLOCK 2 PREPERATION TEAM
Unit 5 Dr. Poonam Gaur, Assistant Unit 6 Adopted from Unit-7, Block Editor and
Professor, ASCO, Amity MJM-027 Coordinator:
University, NOIDA & Dr. Amit Kumar
Dr. Amit Kumar Assistant Professor,
Assistant Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
SOJNMS, IGNOU
Unit 7 Adopted from Unit-8, MJM- Unit 8 Adopted from Unit-9,
027 MJM-027
Unit 9 Mr. Nithil Dennis Unit 10 Adopted from Unit-11,
Associate Professor, Royal MJM-022
Thimphu College, Bhutan
BLOCK 3 PREPERATION TEAM
Unit 11 Adapted from Unit-12, Unit 12 Adapted from Unit-13, Block Editor and
MJM-27 and Revised by MJM-027 Coordinator:
Dr. Amit Kumar, SOJNMS, Dr. Amit Kumar
IGNOU Assistant Professor,
SOJNMS, IGNOU
Unit 13 Adapted from Unit-13, Unit 14 Dr. Amit Kumar
MJM-027 and Revised by Assistant Professor,
Dr. Amit Kumar, SOJNMS, SOJNMS, IGNOU
IGNOU Partly adapted from
Unit-11 MJM-027
ii

COURSE INTRODUCTION: DIGITAL
PHOTOGRAPHY & VIDEOGRAPHY
Digital Photography and Videography are important areas of electronic media. As a student of electronic media, and as a future practitioner, academician or researcher in this field, it is essential that you are exposed to these areas. The course MNM 003 Digital Photography & Videography has been developed in a systematic way so that you can understand the basics of visual communication, structure and functioning of cameras, composition, lighting, and editing in a systematic manner. It has been presented in three blocks comprising 14 units, covering a range of issues in digital photography and videography. Block 1: Tools of Digital Photography talks about the different tools of photography. Unit 1 gives an overview of the journey of photography; Unit 2 focuses on the different types, structure and functioning of cameras; Unit 3 describes the lighting techniques; and Unit 4 discusses the various lenses and accessories used is photography. Block 2: Art and Craft of Digital Photography deals with the important aspects of photography. Unit 5 introduces the visual communication. Some important theories of visual communication have been discussed in this unit;
Unit 6 talks about photographic composition. Different elements and principles
of composition have been discussed here; Unit 7 focuses on some important techniques of digital photography; Unit 8 deals with photo editing. This unit includes photo editing tools and also talks about the ethical aspects of image editing; Unit 9 covers different types photography; and Unit 10 is based on photojournalism. Block 3: Recording Moving Images covers the different important aspects of video recording. Unit 11 explains some more lighting related issues; Unit 12 describes different types of shot sizes and camera angles; Unit 13 talks about various camera movements and their use in video production; and Unit 14 discusses some useful video recording techniques. We hope that you will find the course content informative and useful, and after completing this course, you should be able to:
- describe the types and functioning of still and video cameras;
- understand the art and craft of digital photography;
- explain the types of shots, camera movements and lighting for electronic
cinematography/videography. iii

CONTENT
Unit 1 History Of Photography 1
Unit 2 Camera Types Structure and Functions 18
Unit 3 Lighting Techniques - I 35
Unit 4 Lenses and Other Accessories 47
Unit 5 Intoduction to Visual Communication 59
Unit 6 Photographic Composition 73
Unit 7 Photography Techniques 91
Unit 8 Photo Editing 112
Unit 9 Types Of Photography 125
Unit 10 Phtojournalism 142
Unit 11 Lighting Techniques - II 156
Unit 12 Shot Sizes & Camera Angles 168
Unit 13 Camera Movements 181
Unit 14 Video Recording Techniques 191
iv

UNIT 1 HISTORY OF PHOTOGRAPHY
Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Learning Outcomes
1.2 Pre Photography developments
1.2.1 Light and Image
1.2.2 Camera Obscura and The Pioneers
1.2.3 Associated Scientific Developments
1.3 Early Photography Techniques
1.3.1 Capturing of an image: Heliography
1.3.2 The Technique of fixing of the image: Daguerreotype
1.3.3 Talbot and the Calotype
1.3.4 Amateur Photography and Kodak
1.4 Evolution of Technique
1.4.1 Twin Lens Reflex
1.4.2 Single Lens Reflex
1.5 Different types of Cameras
1.5.1 Point and Shoot Cameras
1.5.2 Polaroid Cameras
1.6 Digital Era
1.6.1 Invention of the DSLR
1.7 Let Us Sum Up
1.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
1.9 References and Further Readings
1.0 INTRODUCTION
It is commonly said, ' a picture is worth a thousand words.' In today's day and age, when the picture can be easily clicked with a simple mobile phone, it is unimaginable to think the vast number of inventions, ideas and research that has gone into the human fascination for capturing the image. Photographic Science required human toil and research of more than two thousand years to reach the present day developments. The meaning of the term Photography is "Photos" + "graphein" = to paint with light. This implies that the human invention connected to photography was directly related to the research and understanding of light as a medium. This includes the very basic principle that light travels in straight lines. Many inventors and scientists worked on different principles, methods of capturing light, quality of lenses, photosensitive material till the overall invention of photography as an invention could be registered.

Digital Photography The evolution of photography as a medium can be separated in five distinct & Videography stages. These are the following:
- STAGE 1 Till 1800 A.D Pre-photography inventions
- STAGE 2 1800-1900 Early Photography
- STAGE 3 1900-1945 New Technique
- STAGE 4 1945-1970 Popularity
- STAGE 4 1970 onwards Digital Innovation
The period of World War I (WW-I) is a critical period in the history of photography . Before WWI (1914 -1919), the focus was on literary ways of communictaion. Photographs were considered an addition to information. WW-I created the significance of photographs whether it was for documentation or for propaganda purposes. Furthermore, improvements in technology and simplification of processes transformed photography from a specilist pursuit among selected people to a popular hobby practiced by millions. Professional photography also evolved as a genuine profession considering the need of a commerical industry now dependent on pictures especilly mass communication meidums like print. In fact specilised aspects of photography like aerial photography was first practiced in 1858. By 1914 with the outbreak of the war, it now became a valuable cpmponent of scientific and military recording of war zones.
1.1 Learning Outcomes
After going through this unit, you will be able to:
- understand light as an integral part of invention of photography;
- identify the various phases in the development of photography;
- analyse the need based approach in its evolution; and
- explain the transition from analogue to digital method of capturing
images.
1.2 PRE PHOTOGRAPHY DEVELOPMENTS
The pre photography period is the period in human history when various scientists, philosophers and thinkers explored the qualities and attributes of light. During this period two major developments took place. The optical principle of light, which has the ability to form images, was observed and the fact that some chemicals undergo change as they have exposure to light was also investigated. These developments were studied independent of each other in different parts of the world. The major landmark developments, which can be considered, are:
- Preliminary Investigations with chemicals
- Preliminary Investigations with light
- Camera Obscura

1.2.1 Light and Image History of
Photography In simple words, a photographic image is created by capturing various amounts of light reflected from the various parts of a scene. It is important to note that the fascination of human mind in recording the image seen by the human eye. Before any concept of capturing an image, it was important to understand the nature of light and basic attributes of lenses. Recording light and creating a latent inverted image was far more harder. Many philosophers and scientists across the world have mentioned the ability of light to travel in a straight line, diffract and create an image. These include Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 5th century, BC. Greek philosopher Aristotle noticed that light passing through holes between leaves projected an image of a sun eclipse on the ground. Many scientists to understand the behavior of light and its ability to travel in a straight line performed various experiments across the world using pinhole kind of devices.
1.2.2 Camera Obscura and The Pioneers
Camera Obscura, a dark chamber or room with a hole - probably known to Aristotle more than 2,000 years ago. Aristotle (384-322 BC) understood the optical principle of the camera obscura. He viewed the crescent shape of a partially eclipsed sun projected on the ground through the holes in a sieve. This can be considered as the ancestor of the photographic camera. In Latin the term means "dark chamber," and the earliest versions, consisted of small-darkened rooms with light admitted through a single tiny hole. The result was that an inverted image of the outside scene was cast on the opposite wall. For centuries, the technique was used for viewing eclipses of the Sun without endangering the eyes. Another mention of this type of device was by the Chinese philosopher Mo- Ti (5th century BC). He formally recorded the creation of an inverted image formed by light rays passing through a pinhole into a darkened room. He called this darkened room a "collecting place" or the "locked treasure room." In 1490 Leonardo Da Vinci is known to draw two clear descriptions of the camera obscura. In 1544, Dutch scientist Reinerus Gemma-Frisius mentions large rooms in use for observing a solar eclipse. In the 16th century the introduction of a convex lens to imprive image quality and then addition of a mirror to reflect image are also documented. In 1558, Giovanni Battista Della Porta recommended the use of such a device to aid for drawing for artists. Image (1.1) Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Pinhole-camera.png

& Videography Image 1.2 The principle of Camera Obscura. Illustration of the camera obscura principle from James Ayscough's A Short Account of the Eye and Nature of Vision. Image Source: https://www.lookandlearn.com/history-images/YW025358V/Optics-the-principle-of-the- camera-obscura Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0))
1.2.3 Associated Scientific Developments
The process of photography or capturing an image thru the medium of light interacting with a light sensitive material has been a tedious journey of many associated developments initiated by different discoverers, scientists and inventors. Some of these important milestones are:
- 1100 - 1600 - Discovery of Silver Halides.
A silver halide, which can also be understood as a silver salt, is an important chemical compound in the evolution of photography. This compound is a combination between Silver and a halogen. Examples of halogens are chlorine, iodine and bromine. Silver halides are the light-sensitive chemicals, which are critical because they are commonly used in photographic film and paper.
- 1560's - Description of a diaphragm
Daniele Barbaro was a key figure who contributed to understanding of a diaphragm or aperture. In his 1567 work La Pratica della Perspettiva, he suggested that the picture etched by using a camera obscura is clearer if the lens is covered to close in on less circumference in the center. This is the beginning of understanding aperture size and sharpness of image.
- 1660's - Discovery of composition of white light
The scientific composition of light as a mixture of the VIBGYOR colors began with Isaac Newton experiments with light. The colors within light are red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet.

- 1700's - Photo-chemical effect History of
Photography Wilhelm Homberg is a key figure whose experiments helped explain how light darkened some chemicals. In 1705, he identified the sulfur principle with light. Homberg's theory reflects the interaction of light with matter.
- 1720's - Silver Nitrate
Johann Heinrich Schulze discovered that silver nitrate darkened upon exposure to light. Schulze proved that the darkening of silver salts was caused by light and not heat. Though demonstrated the fact using sunlight to record words on the salts, he made no attempt to preserve or fix the images permanently. Check your progress: 1 Note : Use the space below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at end of unit. Q 1 : Mention at least one important pre development to the invention of photography. Q 2: Why is it said that Photography wasn't a brainchild of any single person. Q 3: Explain the term 'Camera Obscura.' Mention some of its early uses.
1.3 EARLY PHOTOGRAPHY TECHNIQUES
In this section we shall discuss early photographic techniques. This discussion will help us to understand the different stages in the development of photography.
1.3.1 Capturing of an image: Heliography
The French physicist, Joseph Neipce, was able to capture the first known photograph (he called it a heliograph) in 1826. Neipce was an amateur inventor who lived in a city close to Paris. He had interest in Lithography. Lithography is a process in which drawings are copied or drawn by hand onto lithographic stone and then printed in ink. Using this knowledge, he devised a method by which light could draw the pictures he needed. Neipce used the acid resistant Bitumen of Judea, which was used in etching. Bitumen hardened with exposure to light. In his experiments, he coated Bitumen on glass plates, pewter and other materials. Finally, he was able to register an image from the window of his room in 1826. This exposure was approximely for 8 hours !

& Videography Image 1.3 The first photograph - as heliograph: View from the Window, 1826 Source:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/View_from_the_Window_at_ Le_Gras#/media/File:View_from_the_Window_at_Le_Gras,_Joseph_
Nic%C3%A9phore_Ni%C3%A9pce.jpg Public Domain
1.3.2 The Technique of fixing of the image: Daguerreotype
In 1827 Niepce had also begun his association with Louis Daguerre, a French painter who had also been experimenting along parallel lines. In 1839, the daguerreotype was announced. This was an invention of a method for making a direct positive image on a copper plate with a thin coat of silver. The process had its disadvantages and was to be done with great care. The plate had to be clean and polished till the surface looked like a mirror. It was then exposed to iodine and transferred to a camera. These cameras had a sliding box design. Image 1.4 Cameras with a sliding box design (Source: image from public domain) The most dangerous and hazardous part was that after being exposed to light, the plate was developed over hot mercury until the image appeared. In order to permanently fix the image, this exposed plate was immersed in a solution of sodium thiosulfate or salt and then toned with gold chloride. To etch an image exposure timings could be anything from 3-15 minutes. This form of photography was very popular in Europe in the mid 19th century and parlors had sprung up looking at the popularity of image capturing. A disadvantage of the daguerreotype process is that it was impossible to duplicate an image. The images produced are positives rather than negatives.

History of
Photography Image 1.4 A visual of the Daguerreotype Source:https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6a/Woman_with_ an_Accordion_daguerreotype_MET_DP224724.jpg Metropolitan Museum of
Art, CC0, via Wikimedia Commons
1.3.3 Talbot and the Calotype
The daguerreotype had its base on metal. The process was also cumbersome and dangerous as there was use of mercury vapour in the fixing process. In 1840, while experimenting with Gallic acid Talbot discovered that the acid could be used to develop a latent image. Gallic acid is a chemical, which increased the sensitivity of his prepared paper. This discovery revolutionized photography on paper. The exposure time came down substantially from around one hour to produce a 6.5-by-8.5-inch negative to barely one minute of exposure. Talbot named his improved negative process the Calotype meaning "beautiful picture," in Greek. The Calotype initiated the introduction of paper as a base instead of metal.
1.3.4 Amateur Photography and Kodak
In 1879, John Carbutt an English photographer thought of using gelatin based dary plates. This was a major development in considering a gelation and emulsion based coating for purpose of fixing the image. In 1887 Hannibal Goodwin who was based in New Jersey, USA, developed the idea of using celluloid as a base for photographic emulsions. George Eastman,the founder of KODAK - who had earlier experimented with sensitized paper rolls for still photography, began manufacturing celluloid rollfilms in 1889 at the plant in Rochester, New York. The most important development in the history of photography was the introduction in 1888 of the Kodak #1 camera and the start of amateur photography. George Eastman invented the simple box camera Kodak that came loaded from the company with a 100-exposure roll of film. When the roll was exposed, the entire camera was sent back to the factory in Rochester. The roll was processed and a new roll was reloaded for the customer, where 7

Digital Photography it was reloaded and returned to the customer while the first roll was being & Videography processed. This was the beginning of a new era. By 1898, just a decade after this development, over 1,500,000 roll-film cameras had reached the hands of amateur shutterbugs. Image 1.5 Advertisement of the Kodak Camera (Image from public domain) Check your progress: 2 Note : Use the space below for your answers Compare your answers with those given at end of unit. Q 1 : Mention at least one early process of capturing the image. Q 2 : What were the disadvantages of the Daguerreotype ? Q 3: How did the Kodak camera encourage amateur photography ?
1.4 EVOLUTION OF TECHNIQUE
The period from 1900 -1945 saw a tremendous growth in the understanding, propagation of photography as part of mass communication as well as development in technique. This is the period when the WWI propelled the use of the camera both for war imagery and propaganda. One of the examples is Kodak produced a small, portable camera from 1912-26, called the Vest Pocket Autographic, nicknamed the "soldier's camera." Kodak sold nearly two million of these cameras.

History of
Photography
Image 1.6 Kodak's Vest Pocket Source:https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
Category:Kodak_Vest_Pocket_Autographic_cameras#/media/File:Kodak_advertisement. jpg Public Domain
1.4.1 Twin Lens Reflex
TLR means Twin Lens Reflex because the camera has two lenses. One is used for viewing and capturing. The reflex is related to the mirror used behind the viewing lens. This allows focusing. Both the lenses are constructed with equal focal length and equal speed. One lens directs light to the dark chamber onto film, the other one helps the photographer to frame the photo. Japanese Yashika and German Rollie are two companies which produced the TLR. Most TLRs take the large format 120 mm in a 6 X 6 size. Advantages:
- Quiet cameras
- Viewfinder image matches image size of film
- Viewfinder does not go black when exposing
- Uses leaf shutters which can sync with a flash at any speed

Digital Photography Disadvantages: & Videography
- Parallax error is a problem at close distance. It means because the
lens taking image and capturing image are not the same. Parallax is a displacement or difference in the apparent position of an object viewed along two different lines of sight.
- Cant interchange lenses so frequently
- Are large and heavy
- May put photographer at risk in volatile situations since stance is of
looking downwards rather than in front
1.4.2 Single Lens Reflex
The SLR or Single Lens Reflex camera, has one lens through which the photographer views and clicks the image. The first 35mm film SLR camera in the world was called Kine Extakta and was developed in Germany in 1936. This camera did not allow viewing of image without it being reversed. It was only after the invention of the roof prism by Kurt Staudinger in 1931, did the SLR become a preferred option. By 1943, it became possible to look at a non- reversed and upright image through the viewfinder at eye-level and take the picture. Advantages :
- Allows person to precisely frame up the picture, focus, and observe
depth of field.
- Uses 35mm format
- Allows choice of fast, accurate modes for setting correct exposure. This
is possible due to through-the-Iens measurement of subject lighting.
- There is a range of lenses and accessories that can be interchanged .
Disdvantages :
- The photographer cannot see image for the moments in time when the
exposure is taking place.
- The camera is electronically and mechanically noisy.
- Most SLRs also rely heavily on battery power to function.
- The range of speed settings for use with flash is limited
Check your progress: 3 Note : Use the space below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at end of unit. Q 1 : Draw the diagram of a TLR or an SLR with correct labeling.

Q 2 : What are the advantages of the TLR ? History of Photography Q 3 : Mention the advantages of the SLR over the TLR?
1.5 DIFFERENT TYPES OF CAMERAS
1.5.1 Point and Shoot Cameras
Many people know cameras in their simplest and cost effective models . The most popular one being a point-and-shoot camera or compact camera. These are cameras which have pre settings, focus free (Auto focus mechanism) , built in flash for low light . They are able to capture moments of life in an easy to shoot way. These cameras donot have interchangleb lenses but sometimes have setting to change frame size to a certain limit. Some may have superzoom option. They are light is weight and small in size. In the history of photography, the popularity of these cameras cannot be underestimated. Amatuer photography and popularity of photographs as an important family heirloom and document has catapulted the medium to a very commerically viable profession and industry. In the ear before digital cameras, an entire ecosystem of film rolls, camera sales, servicing of camera, processing of pictures and curation of albums was a very profitable and widespread industry. The Sony cyber shot is one such popular camera. Point-and-shoot camera usage and sales have declined substantially after 2010 with the multi purpose use of smartphones.
1.5.2 Polaroid Cameras
Polaroid cameras are also instant cameras. This means they have a self developing film which is chemically developed and produced minutes within taking the picture. Polaroid Corporation in the USA pioneered consumer-friendly instant cameras and film, and were followed by various other manufacturers. American scientist Edwin Land is credited with the first instant comemrcial camera in 1948. Check your progress: 4 Note : Use the space below for your answers Compare your answers with those given at end of unit. Q 1 : Define a point and shoot camera and mention two advantages .

Digital Photography Q 2 : What is a poloroid camera ? & Videography
A JOURNEY THROUGH TIME
EXPOSURE to LIGHT needed for CREATING IMAGE
1.6 DIGITAL ERA
1970s is the beginning of inventions connected to the digital revolution. A digital camera can be understood as a device for making digital recordings of images. In 1972, Texas Instruments Incorporated in USA is known to have patented the first 'filmless' electronic camera. The landmark years are :
- 1981 - Sony -commercial electronic model. This model used a "mini"
computer disk drive to store information captured from a video camera.
- 1991 -Eastman Kodak began selling digital cameras
DIDYOU KNOW?
Kodak developed thefirst megapixel camera in 1986 It couldproduce afilm-quality 5 x 7-inch (12.5 x 17.5-cm) print. Difference between Film based cameras and digital cameras : Unlike film cameras, digital cameras do not work on the principle of light hitting chemical agents coated on film. Digital cameras work on the core part known as a semiconductor device. Commonly referred to as a charge-coupled device (CCD) or a complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS). A digital camera stores the image as data on a memory card. These measure intensity of light and colour through the cameras lenses. Pixels or light receptors are an important part of the camera. When light strikes the individual light receptors, or pixels, on the semiconductor, an electric current is induced. Like all digital devices, this is translated into binary digits for storage. A digital camera uses digital optical components to register the intensity and color of light, and converts it into PIXEL data. Digital cameras also have a a LCD screen (Liquid Crystal display). This is a parallel of the viewfinder in film cameras.

Since the 1990s, digital cameras havegained market share. The nalaog cameras History of are now a tresure piece in most homes. Photography Smart telephones and use of cameras within these phones has further revolutionised photography. Adigital camera can store thousands of picturesinstead of only up to 36 pictures
1.6.1 Invention of the DSLR
Do you notice that the digital SLR has largely replaced film-based SLR? This change started from 2000s as digital technology entered many domains earlier dominated by analogue. Nowadays, many people shoot videos with a DSLR as well. This indicates the evolution of technology and optics. Let us begin with the basics on what is a DSLR and the timeline of its invention. It also includes the invention of imaging technology using a digital sensor, called a Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) by Willard S. Boyle and George E. Smith. A digital single-lens reflex camera (often called DSLR) is a digital camera that has a similar mechanism of the SLR but with a digital imaging sensor. The reflex design scheme is the primary difference between a DSLR and other digital cameras. In the reflex design, light travels through the lens and then to a mirror that alternates to send the image to either a prism, which shows the image in the viewfinder in SLR, or the image sensor in case of DSLR when the shutter release button is pressed. Remember, the SLR uses the traditional pentaprism and entry-level DSLRs use a pentamirror. Just like the SLR, the viewfinder of a DSLR presents an image that does not differ substantially from what is captured by the camera's sensor as it presents it as a direct optical view through the main camera lens. Today, you can also notice another similarity between SLRs and DSLRs is that they both use interchangeable lenses. In a DSLR, you can choose to focus either on manual or automatic mode. Some of the essential parts of all digital cameras are analog-to-digital converter, image processor, microprocessors for processing the digital image, data storage. Electronic visual display is also an important aspect of the camera. Timeline for the invention of the DSLR 1969 - Willard S. Boyle and George E. Smith invented the first successful imaging technology using a digital sensor, called a Charge-Coupled Device (CCD). CCD would be the catalyst to the rapid development of digital photography. 1975 - Steven Sasson who worked at Kodak invented the first digital still camera. It used a 100x100 pixel CCD. This camera was the size of a breadbox.

Digital Photography 1981 - Sony unveiled a prototype of an analogue electronic camera that featured & Videography interchangeable lenses and an SLR viewfinder. 1986 - Japanese company Nikon revealed a prototype for the first DSLR camera 1991 - a commercial DSLR was launched by Kodak 1994 - Kodak and Associated Press launched a digital SLR designed for photojournalists 1995 - Nikon co-developed the Nikon E series with Fujifilm. 1995 - Ricoh developed the first digital camera to have a dedicated movie mode 2000 - Fujifilm launched the first interchangeable-lens DSLR to hit the market. The commonly known manufacturers of DSLR cameras are Canon, Sony, Nikon, Fujifilm, Panasonic among others. Check your progress: 5 Note : Use the space below for your answers Compare your answers with those given at end of unit. Q 1 : Explain the advantages of the digital cameras? Q 2 : Define the term Pixel? Q 3 : Name the person who created the first digital camera?
1.7 LET US SUM UP
Photography is an outcome of the research was conducted through thousands of years by scientists and philosophers on the principles of light and capturing of image. The major landmark developments, which can be considered, are:
- Preliminary Investigations with chemicals
- Preliminary Investigations with light
- Camera Obscura
Camera Obscura is an important precursor to modern camera. In Latin the term means "dark chamber," and the earliest versions, consisted of small-darkened rooms with light admitted through a single tiny hole. The result was that an inverted image of the outside scene was cast on the opposite wall. For centuries, the technique was used for viewing eclipses of the Sun without endangering the

eyes. In 1490 Leonardo Da Vinci is known to draw two clear descriptions of History of the camera obscura. Photography The process of photography or capturing an image thru the medium of light interacting with a light sensitive material has been a tedious journey of many associated developments initiated by different discoverers, scientists and inventors. Some of these important milestones are discovery of silver salts, silver halides and their interaction with light. Various experiments were conducted to capture image with exposure to light. These include: * Heliography * Daguerreotype * Calotype process Various kinds of cameras were invented. The prominent ones being : * Kodak's film based roll camera * Twin Lens Reflex cameras * Single Lens Reflex cameras * Point and Shoot Cameras * Polaroid cameras * Digital Cameras Today smart telephones have an inbuilt mechanism to click pictures.
1.8 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS
- Langford, M. (2013). Basic photography. Routledge.
- Wright, T. (2016). The photography handbook. Routledge.
- London, B., Stone, J., & Upton, J. (2008). Photography: the essential
way. Pearson Prentice Hall.
1.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS
Check your progress: 1
1. You can mention anything that is connected to camera obscura.
2. Student can mention two or three scientific developments related to
chemicals like Silver salts or halides that are related to developing images or write about the various experiments like Daguerreotype and Calotype.
3. A camera obscura means a dark chamber. In implementation, it implies
to a darkened room with a small hole or lens at one side through which an image is projected onto a wall. Scientists and philosophers have popularly used camera obscuras with a lens in the opening since the second half of the 16th century. They were employed as aids for drawing and painting. The concept was the stepping-stone in understanding light to conceiving the initial steps in photography.

Digital Photography Check your progress: 2 & Videography
1. Student can mention any process like the Daguerreotype, wet plate or
the Talbot process.
2. The disadvantage of the Daguerreotype were:
i. Too much time needed for the subject to be still. ii. Each individual picture was the only version. There was no possibility of producing a duplicate. iii. The process of developing was hazardous.
3. George Eastman invented the simple box camera Kodak. It was a
comparatively simple device. The camera was loaded with film from the company with a 100-exposure roll of film. When the roll was exposed, the entire camera was sent back to the factory in Rochester. The roll was processed and a new roll was reloaded for the customer. The camera was returned to the customer while the first roll was being processed. This made it easier for people to shoot without worrying about developing the film. By 1898, just a decade after this development, over 1,500,000 roll-film cameras had reached the hands of amateur shutterbugs. Check your progress: 3
1. Students should draw the diagram of a TLR or SLR with labeling.
2. Advantages of TLR :
- Quiet cameras
- Viewfinder image matches image size of film
- Viewfinder does not go black when exposing
- Uses leaf shutters which can sync with a flash at any speed
3. Advantages of the SLR over the TLR :
- Allows person to precisely frame up the picture, focus, and observe
depth of field. * This was not possible in the TLR
- Uses 35mm format
* TLR uses large format. Not easy for all to use
- Allows choice of fast, accurate modes for setting correct exposure. This
is possible due to through-the-Iens measurement of subject lighting. * Allows more possibilities than the TLR
- There is a range of lenses and accessories that can be interchanged .
* This was a bottleneck in TLR hence the SLR has advantage Check your progress: 4
1. These are cameras which have pre settings, focus free (Auto focus
mechanism) , built in flash for low light . They are able to capture moments of life in an easy to shoot way. These cameras donot have

interchangleb lenses but sometimes have setting to change frame size History of to a certain limit. Some may have superzoom option. They are light is Photography weight and small in size.
2. It is known as instant camera.
Check your progress: 5
1. Unlike film cameras, digital cameras do not work on the principle of
light hitting chemical agents coated on film. Digital cameras work on the core part known as a semiconductor device. Commonly referred to as a charge-coupled device (CCD) or a complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS). A digital camera stores the image as data on a memory card. These measure intensity of light and colour through the cameras lenses. Pixels or light receptors are an important part of the camera. When light strikes the individual light receptors, or pixels, on the semiconductor, an electric current is induced. Like all digital devices, this is translated into binary digits for storage. A digital camera uses digital optical components to register the intensity and color of light, and converts it into PIXEL data. Digital cameras also have a LCD screen (Liquid Crystal display). This is a parallel of the viewfinder in film cameras.
2. A pixel is the smallest unit of a digital image that can be displayed and
represented on a digital display device. It is the basic logical unit in digital. Pixels combine to form a complete image. It is also known as a picture element.
3. Steven Sasson who worked at Kodak invented the first digital still
camera. It used a 100x100 pixel CCD.

UNIT 2: CAMERA - TYPES, STRUCTURE AND
& Videography
FUNCTIONS
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 What is a Camera?
2.3 Types of Digital Camera
2.3.1 Point and Shoot cameras
2.3.2 DSLR cameras
2.3.3 Mirrorless Cameras
2.4 Structure of a Camera
2.4.1 Lens
2.4.2 Body
2.5 Functions of a Camera
2.5.1 Functioning of DSLR Camera
2.5.2 How to Hold a Camera
2.5.3 Focus
2.5.4 Different Shooting Modes
2.5.5 White Balance
2.5.6 ISO
2.6 Camera Accessories
2.6.1 Tripod
2.6.2 Filters
2.6.3 Flash
2.7 Let Us Sum Up
2.8 Key Words
2.9 Further Readings
2.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
2.0 INTRODUCTION
The word Photography has Greek roots, broken down to 'Photo' + 'Graphe', which roughly means writing or drawing by light. Camera is nothing but a tool that enables writing with the help of light. This unit will help you to learn about the basic principles of photography. What exactly happens inside a camera and how the image is formed ? We shall also cover various types of digital cameras used for still photography while exploring the pros and cons of each type. We will also learn about the functioning of a DSLR camera, the working of its various controls and analyse how they affect the image. In the end, we shall go through a number of camera accessories and understand their use and purpose in still photography.

2.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Structure and
Functions After going through this unit, you will be able to: * describe the different types of still camera; * identify various parts of a still camera; * explain the working of a still camera; and * know the different accessories used with still cameras.
2.2 WHAT IS A CAMERA?
Photography seems like a pretty simple hobby to take up. Everyone has become a photographer in recent times with smartphones equipped with cameras of great megapixels. But photography dates back to times when one photograph took hours to be exposed and one had to wait for days for developing of a photograph. You may remember the times when cameras were loaded with film rolls, which contained a total of 36 frames. These 36 frames were exposed very selectively, sent to the chemical labs for processing and then after a week-long wait, the photographs arrived along with the negatives. Compared to that, today one is able to click ten photos of themselves even before exiting the house. And processing is far forgotten as all the display and archival happens on social media instead of photo albums. The word camera originally is derived from the Greek word 'Kamara', meaning a dark room. It is a shortened version of the 'Camera Obscura', which was a light proof tent, allowing light to enter through an opening fitted with a lens. The lens was used to collect and converge light to a point, just like it happens in case of a magnifying mirror. Artists sitting inside the room used to trace the image created by light falling onto a flat surface. This flat surface was later on replaced by materials coated with photosensitive chemicals, that allowed certain chemical reactions to take place, triggered by the light. The bases for these materials started with broad sheets of glass to tiny 35 mm films, thus reducing the size and mobility of the cameras in use as well. Today, with the advent of digital technology, photography has also evolved rapidly over the past three decades. A digital camera utilizes the same optical principles as a film camera, aided with a small photosensitive chip that has replaced the film. So while the chip converts the light energy into electric signals, another chip, or memory card stores these signals in form of digital data. This data can then be touched upon in our computers, mobile phones, etc. and shared over the Internet across social media and also be printed and pasted in photo albums like that of yesteryears. You may have taken a selfie, uploaded it to your social media account and gathered feedback from your peers on your photography skills. Digital cameras have made the process of photography simpler. We shall discuss the working of a digital camera in detail further in this unit.
2.3 TYPES OF DIGITAL CAMERA
There are many types of digital cameras available in the market. They may be categorized differently based on their working.

Digital Photography 2.3.1 Point and Shoot cameras & Videography The simplest type is a point and shoot camera. Its name aptly describes its use. You point at the image to be clicked, and just click the button to shoot it. While easy to use, it does not need the photographer to think about any other controls other than putting what is to be photographed in front of the camera. The camera does all the calculation and adjustment on its own for capturing the image. It is good for people who do not have any artistic or professional inclination towards learning photography. Due to less knowledge and skills required to operate it, the major market share today is occupied by these cameras. The camera of your smartphone also lies in this category, but depending on the model and budget of the phone, it may offer you certain customizations for the image.
Figure 1: Point and Shoot Camera
Point and shoot cameras are compact and light weight, easy to handle and can capture video as well. These cameras have separate mechanisms and lenses for capturing and viewing the image. The lens allows the light in to capture the image while the viewfinder allows the light in for the eye to view and compose the frame. Due to the difference in the position of the two lenses, parallax error occurs while shooting. Parallax error occurs when there is a difference between the conceptualized frame and the captured frame due to the position of the two lenses. Image source: No machine-readable author provided. Marb~commonswiki assumed (based on copyright claims). / CC BY-SA (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) Figure 2: Parallax error

2.3.2 DSLR cameras Camera - Types,
Structure and
DSLR stands for Digital Single Lens Reflex cameras. They are named so as Functions they have single lens for viewing and capturing the image. DSLRs have larger sensors than average point and shoot cameras, thus resulting in better image quality. DSLRs also provide a lot of control over the image by allowing to change lenses, altering aperture, shutter, ISO and many other functions as well that we shall discuss later in the chapter. These cameras have ruled the market for the longest time due to their practicality of functioning and amount of control they offer to the photographer over the image. Variations in models are also available depending upon the use. Consumer end cameras would provide lesser specifications, while prosumer end may provide an array of functions. DSLRs also allow for video recording, but control may vary depending on the budget and the model of the camera. Few higher end cameras also allow for sound recording with the help of attachable devices. Stanley Ka Dabba (2011) was the first film in India to be completely shot on DSLRs. Figure 3: DSLR Camera
2.3.3 Mirrorless Cameras
DSLRs have a small reflex mirror housed inside the body of the camera that functions to remove the parallax error as faced by the point and shoot cameras. Further improving upon the design of the DSLRs, mirrorless cameras work on a digital display system rather than an optical one. Simply put, in the absence of the reflex mirror, the image sensor supplements the viewfinder with the signal it is receiving. So the photographer is able to see the image live on a small LCD screen at the back of the camera. All the controls and functions can be accessed through this screen and there is no need of using a viewfinder at all. Compared to DSLRs, these cameras are smaller, lighter and quieter as the mirror is removed, which moves when shutter is released. Unlike the DSLR cameras these cameras also give a live feedback of depth of field and exposure on the viewing screen. Slowly and steadily gaining the market share, mirrorless cameras are replacing the DSLRs.

& Videography Figure 4: Mirrorless Cameras Image source: Yitech / CC BY-SA (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- sa/4.0) Check Your Progress : 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for you answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is parallax error?
2. How is a DSLR camera different from a point and shoot camera?
3. The film, Stanley Ka Dabba (2011) was completely shot on DSLR.
a. True b. False
4. Mirrorless cameras are lighter than the DSLR cameras.
a. True b. False
5. In which of the following does Parallax error occur ?
a. SLR 22 b. DSLR

c. Point and Shoot camera Camera - Types,
Structure and
d. None of the above Functions
2.4 STRUCTURE OF A CAMERA
You may remember that at the beginning of this chapter, it was discussed that a camera is a light tight box, allowing the light to enter by measure, in order to capture a framed image. Now we will dissect and discuss the structure of a digital camera. A camera can be divided into two main parts: lens and body. These two main parts are made up of many other subparts. Now we shall discuss these parts in detail.
Photo: Poonam Gaur
Figure 5: Parts of camera: lens and body
2.4.1 Lens
A lens is a finely polished glass, curved on both sides, used to allow light to enter the camera and focus the image on the sensor. A photography lens is usually an assembly of lenses that are adjusted in order to achieve the desired image. Better the lens of a camera, better the photographs being captured. Now, we shall discuss different types of photographic lenses.
Types of Photographic Lenses
Photographic lenses are categorized on the basis of their focal lengths. Focal length of a lens is the distance between its optical centre to the focal point. In a camera, the sensor is placed at the focal point of the lens in order to expose for the image. You may remember from your high school physics that if the object is at infinity, the image will be created on the focal point. Focal length affects the angle of view of a lens as well. Lesser the focal length, more the angle of view. Lenses which are closer to the angle of view of human eyes are called normal lenses. Their focal length is approximately 50-55 mm for 35 mm photography sensors. All perspectives, sizes and distances are seen through these lenses as seen by human eyes. Lenses with focal length lesser than this would have a greater angle of view, thus are called wide angle lenses, for e.g., 24 mm, 30 mm lenses. Going too wide starts distorting the image. One may see the edges distorting in photographs taken by 16 mm or lower lenses. These lenses have smaller lens body. On the other hand, telephoto lenses have a narrower field of vision and a longer lens body. For 35 mm sensors, telephoto lenses begin from

Digital Photography 75 mm and go up to 250-300 mm. There are super telephoto lenses as well, with & Videography 1000 mm focal length. Image source: https://pixabay.com/photos/telephoto-lens-canon-photography-1279897/ Figure 6: Telephoto Zoom lens Lenses with fixed focal length are called prime lenses, while lenses with variable focal length are called zoom lenses. Zoom lenses allow for optical magnification by narrowing down the angle of view, and thus provide for greater flexibility for framing the image without the movement of the photographer.
Other Parts of Photographic Lenses
When you carefully inspect the photographic lens, you will find many different parts. These are - focusing ring, manual / auto focus switch, zoom ring, aperture, image stabilization switch, and lens cap. Here we shall discuss about these parts briefly. * Focusing ring: You may have noticed the focussing ring on the camera, which is the first ring on any camera lens. This ring is used to focus the image in manual focus mode. In auto focus mode, the ring gets locked. * Manual / Auto focus switch: You can find this switch on the lens which allows you to choose between manual focus and auto focus. * Zoom ring: Zoom ring is the another ring found on camera lens. It help to change the focal length of the lens and get the effects of zooming. * Aperture: Aperture is the opening in the camera through which light enters. It works like the pupil of the eye, contracting in more light and enlarging in low light conditions. Similarly, greater the opening in the camera, more light entering and falling onto the sensor and greater chances of overexposing the image. On the other hand, smaller the opening, lesser the light and thus chances of underexposing the image.

Thus, choosing the appropriate aperture is extremely important for Camera - Types, the photograph. We shall discuss about aperture in detail in Unit-7 Structure and (Photography Techniques). Functions * Image stabilization switch: You can find this switch on many lenses. This allows you to take advantage of the image stabilization feature which helps in reducing the effects of camera shake and get sharper photos. * Lens cap: This is a protective cover of the camera lens that protects the lens from scratches and minor collisions.
6.4.2 Body
The body of the camera is designed in such a manner that no light, other than the intended light, comes into it. It is also entirely black as to disallow any sort of reflection within. In a DSLR camera, after the removal of the lens, you can see the reflex mirror and the sensor when one presses the shutter release button. The shutter is located in front of the sensor, which shifts to expose the sensor to light to form the image. The body also contains a lot of circuitry which enables the working of the camera. At the back, one can see the LCD screen with a viewfinder mounted on the top. The LCD screen helps in seeing the live view of the frame being captured and also the other adjustments that can be manoeuvred within the camera. The body of a DSLR camera consists of many other important parts. Now, we shall discuss about them in detail. Image Sensor: The light falls onto the sensor in the camera, which is nothing but an electronic chip, which converts light energy into electric energy. It is of the same size as that of a 35 mm film in full frame DSLR cameras but many DSLR and mirrorless cameras are available with smaller sensors too. The quality of a sensor is measured by how many pixels it has and its size. A pixel is a picture element; a unit in the sensor which enables conversion of light energy into electric energy. Greater the number of pixels in a sensor, greater the data collected and converted into electric signals, thus better the resolution of the photograph. Today the market of digital cameras sees them being marketed on the basis of the number of their pixels, or Megapixels. A megapixel is equivalent to 1 million pixels. Even the smartphone cameras today are competing with DSLR with the help of attachable lenses and better sensors. Mainly two types of camera sensors are used - CCD (Charge-coupled Device) and CMOS(Complementary Metal-oxide Semiconductor) . CMOS is cost- effective and now matches the quality of the CCD. Nowadays CMOS sensor is getting more popularity. Viewfinder: Viewfinder of a camera is on the top at the back. In DSLR camera, it helps in viewing the image being focussed with the help of the reflex mirror and pentaprism. You can also customize the viewfinder's lens according to the power of your eyesight. This is done by customizing the dioptre settings, accessing through a dial on the viewfinder itself. Shutter: While aperture controls the amount of the light entering, shutter is the device which controls the time period it is allowed to fall onto the sensor. Like an actual shutter, it opens and shuts for a defined time period in order to let the exposure take place. Shutter speed is the time for which the shutter is held open. Lesser the time taken, faster the shutter speed and conversely more the time taken, slower the shutter speed. Shutter plays very important role 25

Digital Photography in photography. We shall discuss about it in detail in Unit-8 (Techniques of & Videography Photography). Check Your Progress : 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for you answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is normal lens ?
2. Discuss the difference between prime and zoom lens.
3. Telephoto lenses have a narrower field of view.
a. True b. False
4. Lenses with fixed focal length are called prime lenses.
a. True b. False
5. CMOS stands for
a. Camera Magnet Operated Sensor
b. Complementary Metal-oxide Semiconductor
c. Camera Minor Optical Sensor
d. Complementary Magnetic Optical Semiconductor
2.5 FUNCTIONS OF A CAMERA
With a brief understanding of various parts of the camera, we may proceed further to discuss how these parts work together in tandem for its smooth functioning. In this section, we shall discuss the functioning of a still camera, especially a DSLR camera. However, most of these functions are similar between DSLR and mirrorless cameras.
2.5.1 Functioning of DSLR Camera
Here is a cross section of a DSLR camera given, to make you understand and trace the path of light inside a camera.

Structure and
Functions Image source: By en:User:Cburnett - Own work with Inkscape based on Image:Slr-cross-section.png, CC BY-SA
3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1588769
Figure 7: Cross Section of a DSLR
1- Camera lens, 2 - Reflex mirror, 3 - Focal-plane shutter, 4 - Image sensor, 5
- Matte focusing screen, 6 - Condenser lens, 7 - Pentaprism and 8 - Viewfinder
eyepiece When you look through the viewfinder of an SLR, you are actually seeing a reflection of the image created by the reflex mirror and the pentaprism housed in the viewfinder. The mirror sends the light upwards and the pentaprism reflects it within to rotate the image and sends it to the viewfinder to help compose the image. When the shutter release button is pressed, the mirror swiftly moves upwards, allowing the light to fall onto the sensor to create the image. After the image is captured, the mirror falls back into the place again. As the action of mirror is based on the pressing of a button, it is called a reflex mirror. While the DSLR is a marked improvement on the earlier point and shoot cameras, following are the few disadvantages of a DSLR: i. They are heavy and bulky to carry. ii. The viewfinder goes blank when the photograph is being taken, thus the photographer loses the control over the image. iii. The movement of the reflex mirror may shake the camera. iv. Time lag due to the movement of mirror. These factors have been discounted in the mirrorless cameras, leading to their rapidly gaining popularity in this market segment.
2.5.2 How to Hold a Camera
It is also necessary to know how to hold the camera during photography. If we do not hold the camera correctly then there is a possibility of bad photographs. The stability of the camera is most important in this case. Camera shake may spoil the photograph specially in slow shutter speed. So, we should hold the 27

Digital Photography camera in such a way that it remains maximally stable. In this process, it is & Videography necessary for the body to remain balanced and stable. You should hold the camera by placing the body horizontally on the left palm, to provide it stability and steadiness. Right hand is used to hold the camera while the fingers and the thumb remain free to function the buttons according to the need to capture the image. Hold it tight against the forehead. Figure 8: How to hold a camera
2.5.3 Focus
You may have noticed the focussing ring on the camera, which is the first ring on any camera lens. It helps in moving the camera assembly so that the image produced can be brought into sharp focus. While working in manual focussing mode, one rotates the ring in order to focus in or out of the subject as per the need. It also helps in highlighting one part of the image by focussing it sharper than the rest. In autofocus mode, the ring gets locked and the camera detects the object by using infrared wave mechanism and shoots accordingly. Half pressing the shutter release button helps in measuring and locking the focussing distance.
2.5.4 Different Shooting Modes
You will get different shooting modes in your camera. These modes can be automatic, semi-automatic or complete manual. Here, we shall discuss few important shooting modes. Auto mode: In this mode, the camera sets everything automatically. You cannot change aperture, shutter speed, or ISO. Most cameras provide some pre- programmed settings, for example - portrait mode, landscape mode, close-up mode, sports mode, etc. In these modes the camera automatically sets all the features. In the beginning, you can use automatic pre-programmed modes. Aperture-Priority Mode: You may consider this mode as semi-automatic where you have the freedom to set a few things and some other things will be set automatically by the camera. In aperture priority mode, you have the liberty to change the aperture and ISO and the camera will automatically select the shutter speed to get the correct exposure. Different companies use different icons for this mode, but 'A' and 'Av' are the most popular. Shutter-Priority Mode: It is also a semi-automatic mode where you have freedom to choose shutter speed and ISO and the camera will automatically select the aperture accordingly. 'S' and 'Tv' are the most popular icons used for this mode by different camera companies.

Manual Mode: It is a complete manual mode where you have the freedom to Camera - Types, set all the features of the camera according to your need. This mode gives you Structure and complete control over the camera settings. You can set aperture, shutter speed Functions and ISO according to your requirement.
2.5.5 White Balance
White balance is basically the process of telling the camera what is white in a given light. A white sheet of paper will remain white to you even if the light conditions in your room change from sun light to tube light. This is because your brain is always on auto white balance and identifies the white colour. Why is white important? Because it is a mixture of all colours and identifying it will help in truly identifying all the colours. The camera is not as advanced as your brain. It needs to be specifically told in each light condition what is the true white, in order to capture and recreate all the colours truthfully. Have you noticed photographs which have a green, blue or orange cast to them. That is all the colours appear to be overpowered by a single colour and thus appear as various shades and tones of it. That is due to incorrect white balance. A DSLR has a list of pre-sets which helps the photographer choose what lighting conditions he/she is shooting in, and thus define white for that particular light. It ranges from incandescent, fluorescent, direct sunlight, flash, cloudy and shade amongst others. Camera can also be put on auto white balance which makes it one less thing to think about but white balance does help in true reproduction of colours in any photograph.
2.5.6 ISO
In digital photography, ISO is related to the sensitivity of the image sensor to light. You shall find the ISO button on the body of the camera, through which the ISO setting can be changed. If you increase the ISO, the image sensor's sensitivity to light will increase. This is a useful feature in photography and we will discuss it in detail in Unit-7 (Photography Techniques).
2.6 CAMERA ACCESSORIES
Camera accessories make photography more effective and smooth. In this section, we will discuss some important camera accessories useful in photography.
2.6.1 Tripod
A tripod is an extendable three legged stand for mounting the camera. Its primary function is to keep the camera steady and stable at a position. It is required for long exposures and in case of multiple photographs required from same position. A tripod has two basic parts, the head and the legs. The legs are collapsible and extendable to the desired height and the head has a pan and tilt head, helping in panning, tilting and rotating the camera after it is steadily mounted.

& Videography Image source : https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/en/view-image.php?image=170603&picture=tripod Image source: No machine-readable author provided. Kapege.de assumed (based on copyright claims). / CC BY- SA (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5) Figure 9: Tripod and Monopod Another variation is monopod, which is a one legged stand. So while it provides stability and steadiness, it needs to be held by the photographer all the time.
2.6.2 Filters
Filters are pieces of glass attached to lenses to help filter light waves entering into the lens. Filters also safeguard the lens from dust, sunlight and scratches. Filters help in controlling the colour, contrast, tonality, glare of the photograph along with creating a few special effects. For e.g., Neutral Density filters help in cutting down the light, colour correction filters help in changing the white balance, Star filters help in creating star effect in the photograph, UV filters filter out UV rays from entering the camera and the fog filters help creating a foggy effect in the photographs.

Structure and
Functions Image source: Ashley Pomeroy / CC BY (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0) Figure 10: Types of Filters
2.6.3 Flash
Flash is a device which emits light for a brief instant. It is the most commonly used artificial lighting equipment used for still photography. Many cameras have an inbuilt flash. While shooting in flash mode, it goes on as soon as the shutter release button is pressed to provide light for the photograph. External flashes have to be synchronized with the camera, with the use of a trigger cable or a wireless trigger. Image source: Redline / CC BY-SA (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) Figure 11: External Flash Check Your Progress : 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for you answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the difference between manual focus and autofocus ?

Digital Photography 2. What is White Balance? How does it affect the image ? & Videography
3. In DSLR camera, the viewfinder goes blank while the photograph is
being taken. a. True b. False
4. Monopod has three legs.
a. True b. False
5. In photography, ISO is directly related to
a. Speed of shutter b. Size of aperture c. Sensitivity of image sensor to light d. Focal length of the lens
2.7 LET US SUM UP
To be a good photographer you must know your camera well. In this unit, you were introduced to digital still cameras. We discussed the structure of camera in detail. We discussed variations in designs of still cameras and their working. We also learnt about the various functions one needs to control while capturing a photograph and how each control would affect the photograph. Finally, we talked about a few accessories that help in still photography.
2.8 KEY WORDS
* Lens: a light-bending optical device fitted in front of a camera to focus light coming from subjects at various distances on to the image sensor's surface. * Viewfinder: a system or a window for aiming the camera that will also allow image composition. * Aperture: a mechanical device that adjusts the size of the hole or a diaphragm so more or less light can pass through it. * Shutter: a light-blocking gate that can be opened to let light reach the image sensor for a predetermined and very precise time and then shut to keep light away from the sensor. * Focussing ring: This is the adjustment that we use to bring the subject into sharp focus. It is usually on the lens and has a scale that shows the distance of the subject from the lens. By moving the ring clockwise 32 or anticlockwise we adjust the focus. Most new cameras also have an

automatic focussing mechanism and such cameras are also referred to as Camera - Types, autofocus cameras. Structure and Functions * Pentaprism: A multi sided (five) glass prism housed on the roof of an single-lens reflex camera so that the image that is seen in the lens can be viewed through an optical viewfinder above the lens. The light enters through the lens is reflected up by a reflex mirror to the prism and across to the eye.
2.9 FURTHER READINGS
Langford Michael, Langford's Basic Photography, Focal Press, London
Sharma O.P, Practical Photography, Hind Pocket Books, New Delhi
Prakel, D., 2009. Basics Photography 07: Exposure. AVA Publishing. DK, 2016. Beginner's Photography Guide. Penguin Random House.
2.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Parallax error occurs when there is a difference between the
conceptualized or viewed frame and the captured frame due to the position of the two lenses.
2. The point and shoot camera is the simplest camera. Its name rightly
describes its use. You point at the image to be clicked, and just click the button to shoot it. While easy to use, it does not need the photographer to think about any controls other than putting what is to be photographed in front of the camera. On the other hand, DSLR cameras are more complex and provides a lot of controls to the photographer. DSLR stands for Digital Single Lens Reflex cameras. They are called so as they have single lens for viewing and capturing the image. DSLRs have larger sensors than average point and shoot cameras, thus resulting in better image quality. DSLRs also provide a lot of control over the image by allowing to change lenses, altering aperture, shutter, ISO and many other functions as well.
3. a. True
4. a. True
5. c. Point and Shoot camera
Check Your Progress: 2
1. Lenses which are closer to the angle of view of human eyes are called
normal lenses. Their focal length is approximately 50-55 mm for 35 mm photography sensors. All perspectives, sizes and distances are seen through these lenses as seen by human eyes.
2. Lenses with fixed focal length are called prime lenses, while lenses
with variable focal length are called zoom lenses. Zoom lenses allow for an optical magnification by narrowing down the angle of view, and

Digital Photography thus provide for greater flexibility for framing the image without the & Videography movement of the photographer.
3. a. True
4. a. True
5. b. Complementary Metal-oxide Semiconductor
Check Your Progress: 3
1. In manual focussing mode, we rotate the focus ring in order to focus in
or out of the subject as per the need. It also helps in highlighting one part of the image by focussing it sharper than the rest. In autofocus mode, the ring gets locked and the camera detects for the object by using infrared wave mechanism and shoots accordingly. Half pressing the shutter release button helps in measuring and locking the focussing distance.
2. White balance is the process of referencing the colour white in the given
light for the camera. This helps in reproducing all the colours truthfully as white colour is made up of all the colours. It also helps in removing any colour cast from the image.
3. a. True
4. b. False
5. c. Sensitivity of image sensor to light

UNIT 3: LIGHTING TECHNIQUES - I
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 Light and Lighting
3.2.1 Importance of Lighting
3.3 Characteristics of Light
3.3.1 Intensity or Quantity
3.3.2 Character or Quality
3.3.3 Colour Temperature
3.4 Fundamentals of Lighting
3.4.1 Sources of Light
3.4.2 Direction of Light
3.4.3 Lighting Ratio
3.5 Basic Lighting Techniques
3.5.1 Three-point Lighting
3.5.2 Four-point Lighting
3.5.3 Flash Photography
3.6 Let Us Sum Up
3.7 References and Further Reading
3.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
Without light this whole world would be dark. Neither we nor the camera can see this world without it. Whether it is photography or video production or filmmaking, nothing is possible without light. Light is extremely important for all of them. You must have often heard three words in the context of video or film production - light, camera and action. Here too, the light comes first because the camera cannot record action without the light. The word photography simply means drawing with light. Earlier, film was used in still cameras. The film was a light sensitive strip on which light signals were recorded. Similar films were also used in motion picture. Later, instead of film, image sensors came in place, but these image sensors also record only light signals and then convert these light signals into electronic signals. Therefore, in photography, film making and video production, everywhere cameras record the light signals only. In addition to illuminating the objects of the frame, light also plays many other roles. It is an important tool for visual storytelling. Using light in a planned manner to produce the desired effects is called lighting. Lighting the same subject in different ways can produce different meanings and effects. It was quite difficult to cover all aspects of lighting for photography and television production in one unit, so we have devoted two units to this topic. In this first unit on lighting, we shall discuss some aspects and rest will be discussed in unit-11.35

3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
& Videography After going through this unit, you will be able to: * discuss the importance of lighting in photography and television production; * explain the different characteristics of light; and * describe the basic lighting techniques.
3.2 LIGHT AND LIGHTING
Light is a natural agent (electromagnetic wave) that stimulates sight and makes things visible. It is a portion in the electromagnetic spectrum that is visible to human eye. Its wavelengths range from around 380 to 750 nanometres (Figure - 1). It lies between the infrared and ultra violet range of the spectrum. Lighting on the other hand is the planned and calculated use of light to capture visuals with desired effect (level of illumination or shadow). Figure 1: Electromagnetic spectrum Image Source: Philip Ronan, Gringer / CC BY-SA (https://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by-sa/3.0), https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/30/ EM_spectrumrevised.png
3.2.1 Importance of Lighting
As we have discussed earlier, we cannot even imagine the existence of photography, videography or cinematography without light. It is the backbone of photography or television production. As a photographer or television professional, we use planned and calculated light so that we can get the desired results. This is called lighting. In photography or television production the importance of lighting can be classified into two following types:
1. Meeting the technical requirement of the cameras
2. Aesthetic requirements
1. Meeting the technical requirement of the cameras: Just like our eyes
cannot see without light, similarly the camera also does not see anything 36 without light. Therefore, it is necessary that there is sufficient light in

order for the camera to record visuals. Every camera needs a minimum Lighting Techniques - I light to work optimally. Therefore, the first objective of lighting is to provide the appropriate light for the camera so that it can record the visuals correctly.
2. Aesthetic requirements: Lighting is an important tool for visual
storytelling. It creates meaning. With the help of lighting, we can set the mood of a scene, highlight certain things in the frame, likewise hide certain things or reduce their importance in the composition, and can present the personality of a character in a particular way. If your scene is positive and cheerful, you have to light it in a certain way, but if the scene is full of sadness, you will light it differently. Lighting also plays an important role in making scenes scary. Lighting the same room in different ways can produce different meanings. If your lighting does not suit the mood of the scene, it will create confusion in the audience's mind and you will not be able to tell your story in a smooth and effective manner.
3.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF LIGHT
Light has some characteristics that are frequently used in photography or television/film production. As a student of electronic media, you should understand these characteristics. In this section, we shall discuss these characteristics in detail.
3.3.1 Light Intensity or Quantity
In simple words, light intensity is the available amount of light on a given surface. It refers to the quantity of the light. In photography or television production, it is very important to know how much light is falling on subject/s. A minimum light intensity is required for any camera to be able to record optimally. If that minimum amount of light is not available, camera will not function properly. The technology of cameras is constantly improving. Newer modern cameras are doing better at relatively low light intensity than older cameras. This has also benefited artists working in television. Earlier, in order to meet the technical requirement of the camera, a lot of light intensity was required, due to which TV actors or presenters had to face lights with high intensity. These lights used to produce a lot of heat also. But now the technology of camera has improved significantly. Professionals use light meters to measure the light intensity accurately. The unit of light intensity is Lux (lx) and Footcandle (fc). The light intensity can be measured for the two following different types of lights : i. Incident Light ii. Reflected Light i. Incident Light: The incident light is the light that falls directly on the subject. It is different from the reflected light. The intensity of incident light depends upon the brightness of the light source. This light can be easily measured by standing next to the subject by using a light meter pointing it towards the camera lens. This reading of light metre provides us an accurate measurement of the overall light amount that reaches a specific area.

Digital Photography ii. Reflected Light: As the name itself suggests, it is the light reaching the & Videography camera lens, reflected from the surface of the subject. The reflected light gives you a perfect idea of how much light is bounced off the various subjects and reaches the camera lens. Generally it is used to measure contrast. The intensity of reflected light depends upon two things. First, brightness of the light source and second nature of the objects' surface. Two different types of surfaces will reflect the same amount of light differently. Suppose you are taking a shot of a drawing room. There is a show piece with shiny surface near the couch. If you are putting equal light over that area, the reading for incident light intensity will come same because both the show piece and the couch receive the same amount of light. But when we measure intensity of reflected light, it will be more for the show piece because the show piece is reflecting more light due to its shiny surface, and camera lenses receive more light reflected from the show piece. Reflected light intensity can also be measured with specialized light meters placed near the camera pointing it closely to the subject. The figure (2) explains the difference between incident light and reflected light.
Image Source: Amit Kumar
Figure 2: Incident Light and Reflected Light
Controlling Light Intensity: In photography or television production, you need to control the light intensity according to your requirement. The light intensity can be controlled in many ways. First, you can change the lamp. Suppose you are working with 300W lamp and you need almost half light intensity. Then you can change the lamp and work with 150W lamp. Second, you can use dimmers also. With the help of dimmer, you can decrease or increase the intensity of the light according to your need. Third, you can change the light intensity by changing the distance between the light source and the illuminated subject. If you bring the light source closer to the subject, the light intensity will increase and vice versa. The camera also has many controls to manipulate the light intensity.
3.3.2 Light Character or Quality
The second important characteristic of light is its quality or character. It is basically its hardness or softness. On this basis, light can be divided into two main categories - Hard light and Soft light.

i. Hard Light: The hard light casts hard edged and well defined shadows Lighting Techniques - I with clear border. Small and distant light sources produce hard light. It means, two factors affect the hardness and softness of light. First is size of the light source relative to the subject, and second, distance between light source and the subject. The relationship can be understand as - smaller the light source, harder the light and farther the light source, harder the light. The shadows of these lights are harsh and create deep contrast pictures. Few common examples of the hard light sources are sun (excluding morning, evening and cloudy day), flashlight, etc. Now a question arises that the Sun is very big but still gives hard light, why ? It is true that the Sun is very large but it is far away, so we see it quite small. The size of the Sun relative to us is small. That is why it produces hard light. While hitting a textured surface at an angle, hard light highlights the textures and shows more details in an object. ii. Soft Light: The soft light cast soft edged shadows. Soft lights are diffused and create even distribution of colour tones and fewer shadows resulting in low contrast in the picture. You can find this type of light during cloudy days as the light from the Sun gets diffused passing through the clouds. The light then gets evenly distributed avoiding harshness. In artificial lighting, diffusers and papers are used to diffuse the light manually to get the even tone. As we have discussed above, the size of the light source relative to the subject and distance between light source and subject determine the hardness and softness of the light. Here the relationship is - larger the light source, softer the light and closer the light source, softer the light. The following figure (3) explains the difference between hard light and soft light.
Image Source: Amit Kumar
Figure 3: Shadows created by hard and soft light
3.3.3 Colour Temperature
The third important characteristic of light is colour temperature. When we heat a black body at high temperature, its colour also changes as the temperature increases, from reddish-orange to bluish-white. At different temperatures it radiates different colours, and that temperature is called colour temperature of that particular colour. Colour temperature is the variation of colour tinge of the light sources such as candles, tungsten light bulb, fluorescent tube, midday 39

Digital Photography sun, etc. You should not be confused with the physical temperatures of the light & Videography filaments and tubes. Generally, higher the colour temperature, the bluer it is, and the lower the colour temperature, the redder it is. The colour temperature is measured in degrees Kelvin (K). The standard colour temperature for indoor lighting is 3200 K and for outdoor it goes up to 5600K. As colour temperature increases the light's appearance moves from the colours, red, orange, yellow, white and bluish white consecutively. The Sun is a single light source but it changes its colour at the different times of the day. Here, we shall see colour temperatures of few light sources. For example, candle flame - 1800K, Sunrise/Sunset - 2500K, tungsten halogen - 3200K, early morning or evening sunlight - 3500K, noon sunlight - 5600K, overcast sky - 6500K, etc. Colours with colour temperatures beyond 5000K are considered as cool colours whereas colours with lower colour temperatures ranging from 2700-3000 K are recognised as warm colours. So, the light sources with lower colour temperature (for example- candle light, tungsten light, etc.), release reddish light, and make colours look more warm. On the other hand, light released from a cloudy sky produces a blueish light, and makes colours look cool. It can create a problem in photography or video recording, because in different colour temperatures the camera will not be able to recognize the true white colour. As a result, it will record wrong colours. To solve this issue, cameras are equipped with white balance settings and controls. Activity 1 Take any small object (a small showpiece, pen stand, paperweight, etc.) and keep it in a dark room. Brighten it with an electric torch. You can also use your smartphone torch. Observe the shadow created. Now, place a white thin paper in front of the torch and observe the effect on the shadow. After completing this activity, write the use of diffuser to soften the light. Check Your Progress : 1 Note : Use the space given below for your answers. Compare you answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. How is reflected light different from incident light ?

2. What is soft light ?

Table: 3. Camera captures mostly, light. a. Incident light b. Reflected light

c. None of the above Lighting Techniques - I
4. Morning sun has higher colour temperature than noon sun.
a. True b. False
3.4 FUNDAMENTALS OF LIGHTING
After discussing the main characteristics of light, it is now important to understand some of the fundamental concepts used in lighting. In this section, we shall discuss them in detail.
3.4.1 Sources of Light
An object that emits light is called a source of light. In the context of photography and audio-visual production, light sources can be classified into two main categories:
1. Natural Light Source
2. Artificial Light Source
1. Natural Light Sources: These light sources are available in nature. The
Sun is the main source of natural light. The Moon is also considered a natural light source that provides light at night. However, if we think technically, the Moon does not emit light. It only reflects the sunlight. The Sun is used as the main light source in outdoor photography or television production. You can use different reflectors to reflect sunlight to illuminate different parts of your frame. Sunlight can also be used in indoor shoots. In rooms, you can use windows to get the sunlight. With the help of reflectors you can illuminate different areas of the room with sunlight.
2. Artificial Light Source: Artificial light sources are man-made light
sources. All types of electric lamps fall under this category. We often use artificial light sources in photography or television production. Artificial lights are mainly used in studios, other indoor shoots or outdoor shoots at night but many times they are used in day time outdoor shoots also. There are many artificial lighting options available and you can choose according to your needs. Earlier, tungsten lights were used which produced a lot of heat but now cooler LED lights are also available. We shall discuss about several artificial light sources in the upcoming section on lighting instruments.
3.4.2 Direction of Light
The direction of light also plays an important role in lighting. Here, direction means the relative position of the subject and the source of light. That is, from which direction, from which height, and at what angle is the light falling on the subject. The direction of light determines the effects of lighting. You can understand this effect with a small activity. You should do this activity preferably at night, but if you have a room in your house that you can completely darken in the day, then you can do it in the daytime also. First of all, take a torch. Then along with any member of your family reach the room. Make that family member sit in a chair. Close the door and turn off all the lights there.

Digital Photography Now your room will be completely dark. You can then put the torch light on & Videography the face of your family member from different directions and see its effects. If possible, these pictures can also be taken with a mobile camera. When you put the light from above, a different kind of glow appears on the face which looks like positive and divine light. But as soon as you change the direction of light and put it on the face from the very bottom, its effect also changes. Now the face starts looking a little scary. Now you can put the light from behind and then from the side and see the effects. After finishing this activity, you can analyse it by looking at the pictures taken from the mobile. This analysis will tell you how changing the direction of light falling on the same object may create different effects.
3.4.3 Lighting Ratio
Generally, the lighting ratio is the ratio between the intensity of the key light and fill light. Suppose you are doing portrait photography and using both key and fill lights. You measured the intensity of your key light near the face of your subject with an incident light meter and it came to 600 lux. Then you also measured the intensity of the fill light and if it came to 300 lux. It means, your key to fill lighting ratio was 2:1. The lighting ratio shows the difference between the brightness of key light and fill light. Lighting is a creative work and you can decide the lighting ratio according to your need. You can also experiment with different lighting ratios, but 2:1 is considered to be a popular lighting ratio. It means, key light should be two times brighter than fill light. If you change the lighting ratio to 1:1, the brightness of key light and fill light will be the same and the darkness of shadows will be reduced considerably. This type of lighting is called flat lighting. In this, the contrast is significantly reduced and the picture appears visually dull. More difference between the brightness of key and fill light creates dramatic effects which are visually more interesting.
3.5 BASIC LIGHTING TECHNIQUES
As we discussed earlier, lighting is a planned use of light to achieve the desired effect. It is also a creative field. Here we shall discuss some of the lighting techniques commonly used in photography and television programme production.
3.5.1 Three-point Lighting
Three-point lighting is a basic lighting technique commonly used in photography and television production. As the name suggests, it uses three different lights - key-light, fill light and back light. Here, we shall discuss these lights in detail. Key Light: Key light is the main light which is used to provide adequate light to the subject. It is the brightest light in the lighting setup. In natural lighting, the Sun is used as the key light. You can place key light according to your need but usually we place the key light 45 degree vertical and 45 degree horizontal from the lens axis. So, key light illuminates the subject from one direction and creates shadow on the other side. Figure (4) explains the placement of key light. Fill Light: As the name suggests, fill light is used to fill the shadows created by the key light. It reduces the contrast of the image. Generally softer lights are

used as the fill and it has less intensity (generally 50%) than the key. You can Lighting Techniques - I reduce its intensity by taking the light away from the subject. Diffusers can be used to create the fill light. In natural lighting where sun is used as the key light, you can use the reflectors as fill. We place the fill light on the opposite side of the key light. For example, if key is placed on the left side of the camera, fill will be put on the right side. You can see the placement of fill light in the figure (4). Back Light: The back light illuminates the subject from behind. It illuminates the shoulders and hair of the subject and separates the subject from the background and gives a three dimensional look. If you do not use the back light, then your subject will be affixed to the background. You can place the back light diagonally opposite to the key. Figure (4) shows the placement of back light.
Image Source: Amit Kumar
Figure 4: Three-point Lighting In three-point lighting, you can use these three lights according to your requirement. You can experiment with their intensity and placement.
3.5.2 Four-point Lighting
In four-point lighting, we add one more light to three-point lighting setup and that light is the background light. Let us discuss about the background light. Background Light: We should not confuse between the background light and the back light. The background light is completely different from the back light. It is used to highlight the background. If we want our background to come into the frame, then in this case the background light is used. The direction of this light is towards the background.

Digital Photography Following diagram (Figure-5) shows a four-point lighting setup. & Videography Image Source: Amit kumar Figure 5: Four-point Lighting
3.5.3 Flash Photography
Photographers have been using flash for a long time. It is a device that produces brief bursts of light at daylight colour temperature (about 5500K). This journey began with magnesium ribbons and eventually progressed to the modern flash units. Flash is used in photography to illuminate the subject and sometimes for freezing the movements. You can find different types of flash. The built-in flash comes as a part of the camera. A separate flash unit can also be attached to the camera through accessory shoe (Hot shoe). We can also mount the flash units on the light stands. Single or multiple flashes can be used according to our need. We can use flash as key, fill, back and background lights. These flash units are synchronized with the camera through cable or radio signals and follow the shutter click. Flash can be used with reflectors and diffusers. You can find bounce cards and wide angle diffusers with flash units. Flash units have both the modes - auto and manual. In manual mode, we have flexibility to set the flash power according to our need. The zoom facility is also available in the flash units. Speedlite and Speedlight are two popular brand names of electronic flash units manufactured by Canon and Nikon respectively.

Lighting Techniques - I Activity 2 Take any small statue or doll available in your house and keep it in a completely dark room. Then arrange three torches. Use these three torches as key light, fill light and back light. You can use white paper as diffuser. Taking the help of your family members, do the following activities and take their pictures with your mobile phone: i. Illuminate the statue only with key light. ii. Switch on both key and fill light. iii. Use all the three lights (key, fill and back). iv. Use only the back light. Now, analyse these four pictures and write down the role of key, fill and back light in three-point lighting in your words. Check Your Progress : 2 Note : Use the space given below for your answers. Compare you answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. What is three-point lighting ?

2. Which of the following is not a part of three-point lighting ?
a. Fill light b. Background light c. Key light d. Back light
3. Back light and background light do the same work.
a. True b. False
3.6 LET US SUM UP
As we have already discussed, lighting is the backbone of photography and television / film production. Therefore, its importance is undisputed. It is a creative field and an important tool for visual storytelling. In this unit, we discussed various aspects of lighting in the context of photography and television production. We learned about the different characteristics of light because knowing them is essential to understand the nature of light. We also discussed some basic concepts related to lighting. Lighting is a creative field and you can choose lighting techniques according to your needs. You can also do many new experiments. In this unit, we also discussed some fundamental and popular lighting techniques. To be able to do effective lighting, it is necessary

that we also know about the equipment used in it. Therefore, different types of & Videography lights and lighting accessories were also discussed.
3.7 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Belavadi, V. (2013). Video Production. Oxford University Press. Millerson, G. (2013). Lighting for TV and Film. CRC Press. Owens, J. (2020). Television production. CRC Press.
3.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check You Progress 1
1. The incident light is the light that falls directly on the subject. It is
different from the reflected light. The intensity of incident light depends upon the brightness of the light source. On the other hand, reflected light is the light reaching the camera lens, reflected from the surface of the subject. The reflected light gives you a perfect idea of how much light is bounced off the various subjects and reaches the camera lens. The intensity of reflected light depends upon two things. First, brightness of the light source and second nature of the objects' surface.
2. The soft light casts soft edged shadows. Soft lights are diffused and
creates even distribution of colour tones and fewer shadows resulting in low contrast in the picture. You can find this type of light during cloudy days as the light from the Sun gets diffused passing through the clouds. The light then gets evenly distributed avoiding harshness. In artificial lighting, diffusers and papers are used to diffuse the light manually to get the even tone.
3. b. Reflected light
4. b. False
Check You Progress 2
1. Three-point lighting is a basic lighting technique commonly used in
photography and television production. As its name suggests, it uses three different lights - key-light, fill light and back light. You can use these three lights according to your needs.
2. b. Background light
3. b. False

UNIT 4: LENSES AND OTHER ACCESSORIES
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Photographic Lenses
4.3 Photographic Lens : Important Features
4.3.1 Focal Length
4.3.2 Angle of View
4.3.3 Aperture
4.3.4 Focus
4.4 Types of Photographic Lenses
4.4.2 Classification on the Basis of Focal Length
4.4.2 Classification on the Basis of Flexibility to Change Focal Length
4.4.3 Classification on the Basis of Speed
4.4.4 Macro Lens
4.5 Accessories
4.6 Lens Care
4.7 Let Us Sum Up
4.8 Further Readings
4.9 Check You Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
In photography we see and record the world through lenses. Therefore, the lenses have an effect on the observed and recorded world. It shows the importance of lenses in photography. As a photographer we must know these lenses properly and only then we can use them efficiently for our needs. In this unit, we shall discuss in detail the various aspects of photographic lenses.
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this unit, you will be able to:
- explain the different features of photographic lenses;
- describe the various types of photographic lenses; and
- discuss the uses of different accessories in photography.
4.2 PHOTOGRAPHIC LENSES
The lenses used in photography are not simple lenses, they are quite complex. They contain many optical elements and by combining those optical elements a photography lens is made which can produce a better and sharper image. Many elements are combined in making a photography lens, but when we see their overall effect, it is a converging effect. Lens is also an important topic of science and studied with great depth. Lens designing or optical designing is a

Digital Photography highly specialized field. But in this unit, we shall discuss photography lenses & Videography according to the need of a mass communication student. We shall focus on the aspects of photography lenses that a photographer requires to know. Image 4.1 Cross-section of a photographic lens Image Source: Rama. Inspired from en:File:Symmetrical.png by en:User:Anoneditor, made from scratch by Rama, CC BY-SA 2.0 FR <https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/fr/deed.en>, via Wikimedia Commons
4.3 PHOTOGRAPHIC LENS : IMPORTANT
FEATURES
In this section, we shall discuss about various important features of photographic lenses. These are focal length, angle of view, aperture and focus. First we discuss the focal length.
4.3.1 Focal Length
Focal length is the most common and important feature of any photographic lens. We identify camera lenses by their focal length. Every photographic lens must have its focal length mentioned on it. But what is the focal length? Is it the physical length of the photographic lenses? No, not at all. Please do not get confused between the physical length of the lens and the focal length. Actually, focal length is the distance between the optical centre of the lens and the image sensor. The image sensor is placed at the focal plane. Focal length is measured in millimetres (mm). For example - 35mm, 50mm, 85mm, 200mm, etc. Focal length plays a very important role in photography. It affects the angle of view or view field or the area captured. It also affects the depth of field. Bigger focal length, lesser depth of field. This means that a photograph taken with a 50 mm lens will have a greater depth of field than a photograph taken with a 100 mm lens. Now we shall discuss about angle of view. We shall also examine the relationship between focal length and angle of view.
4.3.2 Angle of View
In photography, angle of view refers to the angular range of a scene that is captured by the camera in its image. Angle of view can be measured horizontal, vertical and diagonal. For example:

i. Angle of view of 50mm lens : Lenses and other Accessories Diagonal - 46deg , Horizontal - 40deg , Vertical - 27deg ii. Angle of view of 35mm lens : Diagonal - 63deg , Horizontal - 54deg , Vertical - 38deg This range also gives an idea of the field view. The angle of view determines how much of the scene will be covered by the camera in its image. More angle of view means more area and things will be covered in image and less angle of view means less area and things will be in picture. Let us try to understand it with an example - you are taking a group photo of a large group of your classmates. You are using a lens that covers all your classmates. Now you change the lens and choose a new lens with less angle of view. If you don't change the distance between the group and the camera, some of your classmates standing on the outer edges of the group may disappear from the picture. The angle of view is determined by the focal length of the lens and the camera format (the size of the image sensor). If the camera format is constant, then the focal length and angle of view have the following relationship:
Longer Focal Length - Narrower Angle of View
For example (Canon lenses for 35mm format) : a. Angle of view of 50mm lens : Diagonal - 46deg , Horizontal - 40deg , Vertical - 27deg b. Angle of view of 85 mm lens : Diagonal - 28deg30' , Horizontal - 24 , Vertical - 16deg c. Angle of view of 800mm lens : Diagonal - 03deg05', Horizontal - 02deg35' , Vertical - 01deg40' All the above examples (a,b & c) show that the angle of view (diagonal, horizontal and vertical) decreases as the focal length increases. Another factor that affects Angle of View is the camera format or the size of the image sensor. Image sensors replaced films in photography and digital cameras use different sizes of image sensors. For example - Full frame (36x24mm), APS-H (Canon) (28.7x19mm), APS-C (Nikon, Sony, Fuji, etc.) (23.6x15.7mm), etc. If we use the same lens of a fixed focal length with full frame and APS-C cameras, it will give a wider angle of view in full frame camera than with APS-C.
4.3.3 Aperture
Aperture is an important feature of photographic lenses. It is a hole or opening of the lens through which light enters the camera. You can change its size. It can be increased or decreased. If you increase its size then more amount of light will enter the camera and if it is reduced then relatively less light rays will be able to enter the camera. The entire amount of light falling on the outer surface of the lens does not cross the lens and go inside the camera. The amount of light that will be able to cross the lens is determined by the size of the aperture itself.

Digital Photography The size of the aperture is denoted by f-numbers or f-stops. For example: & Videography f/1.4, f/2, f/2.8, etc. Here, we should always keep one thing in mind that if the f-number is increasing, it means that the size of the aperture is decreasing. For example: If you compare f /22 and f/8, the aperture size of f/22 will be lesser than that of f/8. We shall discuss more about aperture in unit-7.4. 3.4 Focus
The sharpest image in photography can be obtained at the focal plane and as we discussed above the light gathering surface of the image sensor is placed exactly at the focal plane. If the image is formed exactly at the focal plane, it will get maximum sharpness but images formed before or after the focal plane will be blurred. So in photography, it is important to ensure that the images are formed exactly at the focal plane. To achieve this accuracy, we adjust the distance between the subject, the lens, and the image sensor. This process is called focusing. Photographic lenses have both options - AF and MF. AF stands for automatic focus or autofocus and MF stands for manual focus. If you choose manual focus, you must rotate the focusing ring available on the camera lens to focus on your subject. Once you have achieved proper focus you press the shutter button. In the case of autofocus, the focusing ring locks and your camera automatically focuses on the subject. You cannot move the focusing ring in AF mode. Here, when you press the shutter button halfway down, a motor moves the optical elements in the lens to focus the subject. Check Your Progress : 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for you answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is focal length ?
2. Explain the term 'Angle of View' and how does it impact photography ?
4.4 TYPES OF PHOTOGRAPHIC LENSES
Lenses can be classified on various grounds. In this section we shall discuss the different types of lenses classified on different bases.
4.4.1 Classification on the Basis of Focal Length
On the basis of focal length, lenses can be classified into three following categories: i. Normal/Standard Lens ii. Wide-Angle Lens iii. Telephoto Lens

i. Normal/Standard Lens: A normal or standard lens gives almost the Lenses and other same perspective as the human eye. The viewing experience it provides Accessories is very close to that of the human eye. That's why it is called normal or standard. The focal length of a normal lens varies with the format of the camera or the size of the image sensor. Generally, a lens with focal length approximately equal to the diagonal of the image sensor is called a normal lens. For a full frame camera (36x24 mm), the diagonal of image sensor is 43mm, so 50mm lens will be considered normal lens for this camera. In common terms 35mm to 50 mm lenses are considered as normal. ii. Wide-Angle Lens: Lenses with shorter focal length than the normal lens are called wide-angle lenses. Usually lenses smaller than 35mm focal length fall into this category. It gives wider angle of view or field of view and greater depth of field. These lenses can be used to photograph landscapes, architecture, large groups of people, etc. Wide-angle lenses are available as both prime and zoom lenses. Fisheye lens: Fisheye lenses are ultra-wide or super wide. They give angle of view of 1800 or more. These lenses have very short focal length (usually less than 18mm). Fisheye lenses are used in landscapes, architectures, crowd, artistic photography etc. Barrel distortion is common in fisheye lenses. These lenses are available as both prime and zoom. For example: 16mm fixed focal length fisheye lens, 8-15mm zoom fisheye lens, etc. iii. Telephoto Lens: A lens which has significantly longer focal length than the normal is called telephoto lens. Generally, lenses 85mm or more fall in this category for full frame cameras. These lenses have narrower angle of view and lesser Depth of Field (DOF). Telephoto lenses bring distant objects closer and are popularly used in sports and wildlife photography. In wildlife photography you want to capture animals' movements but you cannot get close to them. If you get close to animals they will not behave naturally and sometimes it can be dangerous. So, telephoto lenses are the best option. Even in sports, you won't be able to get close to players during game, so the only way to get your subject closer is with a telephoto lens. Telephoto lenses are available as both prime lenses (fixed focal lengths) and zoom lenses. For example: 100-400mm, 70-300mm, etc. There may be another sub category in the category of telephoto lenses called super telephoto. Generally, lenses over 200 mm fall in this category. For example: 400mm, 600mm, 800mm, etc.
4.4.2 Classification on the Basis of Flexibility to Change Focal
Length On the basis of the flexibility to change the focal length, photographic lenses can be divided into two following classes: i. Prime lens ii. Zoom lens i. Prime lens : Prime lenses are lenses whose focal length cannot be changed. They are also called fixed focal length lenses. In these lenses,

Digital Photography we do not have the flexibility to change the focal length. These lenses & Videography are optically less complex than the zoom lenses and generally their images are sharper. Since prime lenses are made up of a combination of fewer optical elements, they are also less prone to distortion. Prime lenses are smaller in size and cheaper than zoom lenses. It also offers wider aperture size than the zoom, so your image sensor gets more light. Wider aperture also allows for faster shutter speeds. For example - 50mm, 85mm, 200mm, etc. ii. Zoom lens: Zoom lenses are such lenses which have a range of focal length and within that range we can change their focal length as per our requirement. For example, we take a zoom lens whose focal length is from 50mm to 200mm. In this case, we can change the focal length of this lens anywhere between minimum 50mm and maximum 200mm as per our needs. Zoom lenses are popular because photographers feel comfortable using them. There is no need to carry multiple fixed focal length lenses if you have a zoom lens. Zoom lenses also provide speed. You can take pictures of different situations without changing your lens. You just need to change the focal length in the same lens. We shall understand it with an example. Suppose you are a tree with a 50mm lens and suddenly you saw a beautiful bird on it. Now you want to capture it, but you need a telephoto lens to take that bird's picture. If you are using fixed focal length lens then you need to replace 50mm lens with 200mm telephoto lens. This takes time and it is possible that the bird will not be available due to this delay. Now just imagine that you were shooting with a 50mm-200mm/55mm- 200mm zoom lens. So in this case, there is no need to replace the lens. You can quickly change your focal length to 200mm and capture the bird. There are different categories of zoom lenses available in the market. For Example: Fisheye zoom : 8mm-15mm Ultra-wide zoom : 14mm-35mm, 10mm-18mm, 16mm-35mm, etc. Standard zoom : 18mm-55mm, 18mm-135mm, 24mm-105mm, etc. Telephoto zoom : 70mm-200mm, 100mm-400mm, 100mm-500mm, etc. There are many advantages of zoom lens but some disadvantages too. Generally prime lenses have wider maximum aperture than a zoom. Since zoom lenses are quite complex and are made up of multiple optical elements, the chances of distortions are also high. Cheap zoom lenses are prone to distortions and good quality zooms are quite expensive. Zoom lenses are bigger and generally we tend to compromise on the perspective when using a zoom lens.
4.4.3 Classification on the Basis of Speed
Lens speed is linked to the shutter speed allowed by a photographic lens. It depends on the maximum aperture size of the lens. If a lens has a larger maximum aperture, it can allow faster shutter speeds. On the basis of this criterion, photographic lenses can be classified into two following categories:

i. Fast Lens Lenses and other Accessories ii. Slow Lens i. Fast Lens: Fast lenses are lenses with large maximum aperture. In general, lenses with maximum aperture of f/2.8 or higher fall into the category of fast lenses. The larger aperture allows more light to enter the camera. So we can go for a faster shutter speed without reducing the amount of light required for photographs. Since these lenses have wide maximum aperture, they will be useful in situations where we shoot in low light conditions or we need to use a fast shutter speed without compromising on exposure. We can understand this with an example. Suppose you have to shoot an indoor sports event. You need to go with fast shutter speed to freeze the actions of the players but you also need proper light on your photos. So, if you have a fast lens with a large maximum aperture, you will increase the shutter speed as well as the size of the aperture to freeze the motion with proper exposure. We shall discuss these things more in Unit 7. ii. Slow Lens : Slow lenses are lenses with relatively small maximum aperture. Since they have relatively small maximum aperture, they need to go with slower shutter speeds to get the optimal exposure.
4.4.4 Macro lens
Macro lenses are used for extreme close-up photography. If you want to capture a small beautiful insect with all its details then you need a macro lens because with normal lens it will be difficult to focus the insect very closely. These lenses enable us to record 1/2 life size to life size images without any accessories. 1/2 life size means 1:2 reproduction ratio and life size means 1:1 reproduction ratio. Here you need to understand what the reproduction ratio is. The reproduction ratio is the ratio between the size of the image recorded on the image sensor and the actual size of the subject. It can be calculated by dividing the size of the image recorded on the image sensor by the actual size of the subject. So if the size of the image recorded on the image sensor is equal to the actual size of the subject then it is said to be life size (reproduction ratio 1:1) and if the size of the image recorded on the image sensor is half of the actual size of the subject, it is called 1/2 life size (reproduction ratio 1:2). Check Your Progress : 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for you answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is a zoom lens and how is it different from a prime lens?
2. Differentiate between wide angle lens and telephoto lens.

Digital Photography 4.5 ACCESSORIES & Videography i. Lens Hood : Lens hood is a device which is placed at the end of a photographic lens. It blocks the rays of light (from strong light sources) coming into the lens from side angles and causing glare or lens flare. By doing so it improves the image contrast. Lens hood is also useful to protect the front element of camera lenses from scratches, accidental impacts, fingerprints, etc. Generally there are two types of lens hoods available in market - Cylindrical and Petal-type. Cylindrical lens hoods should be avoided with wide angle lenses. When using a lens hood, we need to be careful for two things - the lens hood shouldn't get into your photos and it shouldn't block your built-in flash. Image 4.2 Lens with and without lens hood Source: Tom Roeleveld from Zoetermeer, The Netherlands, CC BY 2.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by/2.0>, via Wikimedia Commons ii. UV Filter : UV filter means ultraviolet filter. It was very useful in the days when photography cameras used films. It reduces the amount of ultraviolet rays entering the camera to improve the image. Photographic films were quite sensitive to UV rays. But now in the age of digital photography there is not much need for additional UV filters to cut off UV light as digital cameras are less sensitive to UV rays. But UV filters are also used to protect lenses. It is like an additional protective shield on the front surface of your photographic lens. Sometimes accidental scratches can occur in the lens. If you use a UV filter, then instead of expensive lenses, there will be scratches on the filter. It is advisable to use a good quality UV filter to maintain your image quality. Cheap UV filters may spoil your image quality. iii. Tele-converter : A teleconverter can be used to enhance the telephoto effect of a lens. It is attached between the camera body and the lens. If you have a 70mm-200mm lens and you use a 1.4x magnification teleconverter you can get the effect of a 280mm lens. And you can get the effect of up to a 400mm lens if you use a 2x magnification teleconverter. Teleconverters are small in size and are cost effective. If you have 70mm- 200mm lens but you want to shoot with 400mm lens then you have two options. Buy a 400mm lens or go with a compatible 2x magnification teleconverter. Teleconverter option will be quite economical for you.

Lens speed or loss of light and possible decline in sharpness are some of Lenses and other the disadvantages of using teleconverters. Accessories iv. Extension Tubes : Extension tube is an accessory used between the camera body and the lens. It increases the distance between the lens and the image sensor. It is also called extension ring. Extension tubes help in closer focusing and enable you to do macro photography without a true macro lens. v. Reversal Ring Adapter : This adapter helps to fit the lens with the camera in reverse position. First fit this adapter to your camera body and then you can mount your lens on the camera in reverse position. This technique is used for macro photography. vi. Lens Case/bag : The lens case is used to store or transport lenses safely. These cases/bags are available in different sizes. vii. Lens Cap: Lens caps are very useful as they protect the camera lens from scratches and fingerprints.
4.6 LENS CARE
Lens is one of the most important components of our camera and must be taken care of properly. By keeping the following things in mind, we can protect our photographic lenses : * We should always use lens cap * Do not carry the camera on your shoulder * Do not carry the camera in a bag containing other loose items without lens protection * Clear glass UV filter can be used to protect the lenses * Lens hoods are also useful for protecting the photographic lenses * Clean the lens with lens cleaning fluid * Never clean the lens with a dirty or rough cloth as it can scratch the lens * Lens fungus is also a threat to photographic lenses. To keep the lenses safe from fungal growth, they should be kept away from dust and moisture. Always keep lenses in a cool and dry place. * If you are not going to use your camera lenses for a long time, keep them in a dust-free and moisture-proof cabinet with a silica gel packets. These silica gel packets absorb moisture. Activity 1 Take pictures of the same subject from the same distance with lenses of different focal lengths. You can also use a zoom lens and take pictures by setting different focal lengths. Compare all photographs and write down your observations. Check Your Progress : 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for you answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit. 55

Digital Photography 1. List five things that should be kept in mind to protect photographic & Videography lenses.
2. Explain the uses of any three camera lens accessories.
4.7 LET US SUM UP
Lenses play an important role in photography. If you want to become a good photographer, then you must have proper knowledge of photographic lenses. Understanding lenses and their features helps us to choose suitable lenses for various photographic assignments. In this unit we have discussed various aspects of photographic lenses. We talked about the important features of camera lenses i.e. focal length, angle of view, aperture and focus. We also discussed the different types of lenses and their uses. And lastly, lens accessories also help us in photography. We have also discussed about these accessories in this unit.
4.8 FURTHER READINGS
Kelby, S. (2012). The digital photography book. Peachpit Press. Langford, M., Fox, A., & Smith, R. S. (2015). Langfords basic photography: the guide for serious photographers. 10th Edition. Amsterdam: Focal Press/ Elsevier. Peterson, B. (2016). Understanding exposure: how to shoot great photographs with any camera. AmPhoto books. Judge, A. (2013). Understanding DSLR Lenses: An Illustrated Guidebook.
4.9 CHECK YOU PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress : 1
1. Focal length is the distance between the optical centre of the lens and the
image sensor. The image sensor is placed at the focal plane. Focal length is measured in millimetres (mm). For example - 35mm, 50mm, 85mm, 200mm, etc. Focal length is the most common and important feature of any photographic lens. We identify camera lenses by their focal length. Every photographic lens must have its focal length mentioned on it.
2. In photography, Angle of View refers to the angular range of a scene that
is captured by the camera in its image. Angle of view can be measured horizontal, vertical and diagonal. For example: Angle of view of 50mm lens (diagonal - 460 , horizontal - 400 , vertical - 270), Angle of view of 35mm lens (diagonal - 630, horizontal - 540 , vertical - 380 ). This range also gives an idea of the field view. The angle of view determines how much of the scene will be covered by the camera in its image. More

angle of view means more area and things will be covered in image and Lenses and other less angle of view means less area and things will be in picture. Accessories Check Your Progress : 2
1. Zoom lenses are such lenses which have a range of focal length and
within that range we can change their focal length as per our requirement. For example, we take a zoom lens whose focal length is from 50mm to 200mm. In this case, we can change the focal length of this lens anywhere between minimum 50mm and maximum 200mm as per our needs. On the other hand, prime lenses are lenses whose focal length cannot be changed. They are also called fixed focal length lenses. In these lenses, we do not have the flexibility to change the focal length.
2. Lenses with shorter focal length than the normal lens are called wide-
angle lenses. Usually lenses smaller than 35mm focal length fall into this category. It gives wider angle of view or field of view and greater depth of field. On the other hand a lens which has significantly longer focal length than the normal is called telephoto lens. Generally, lenses 85mm or more fall in this category for full frame cameras. These lenses have narrower angle of view and lesser Depth of Field (DOF). Telephoto lenses bring distant objects closer and are popularly used in sports and wildlife photography. Check Your Progress : 3
1. By keeping the following five things in mind, we can protect our
photographic lenses : * We should always use lens cap. * D o not carry the camera in a bag containing other loose items without lens protection. * L ens hoods are also useful for protecting the photographic lenses. * N ever clean the lens with a dirty or rough cloth as it can scratch the lens. Use lens cleaning fluid to clean the lens. * I f you are not going to use your camera lenses for a long time, keep them in a dust-free and moisture-proof cabinet with a silica gel packets. These silica gel packets absorb moisture.
2. Lens Hood: Lens hood is a device which is placed at the end of a
photographic lens. It blocks the rays of light (from strong light sources) coming into the lens from side angles and causing glare or lens flare. By doing so it improves the image contrast. Lens hood is also useful to protect the front element of camera lenses from scratches, accidental impacts, fingerprints, etc. Tele-converter : A teleconverter can be used to enhance the telephoto effect of a lens. It is attached between the camera body and the lens. If you have a 70mm-200mm lens and you use a 1.4x magnification teleconverter you can get the effect of a 280mm lens.

Digital Photography Extension Tubes : Extension tube is an accessory used between the & Videography camera body and the lens. It increases the distance between the lens and the image sensor. It is also called extension ring. Extension tubes help in closer focusing and enable you to do macro photography without a true macro lens.

UNIT 05: INTRODUCTION TO VISUAL
COMMUNICATION
Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.2 Visual Communication : An Introduction
5.3 What is Visual Communication
5.2.2 Visual Thinking
5.2.3 Different Tools of Visual Communication
5.2.4 How do we see ?
5.2.5 Importance of visuals in communication
5.3 Theories of Visual Communication
5.4.1 Sensual Theories
5.4.2 Perceptual Theories
5.4 Elements of Design
5.5 Principles of Design
5.6 Let Us Sum Up
5.7 Further Readings
5.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
Visual communication is a very important and powerful area of communication. We all know that conveying messages through visuals is very effective and impactful. If we look around us, we are always surrounded by visuals. Our eyes keep seeing different types of scenes continuously. Even in sleep when our eyes are closed, we cannot avoid visuals. Even at that time the scenes go on in our mind in the form of dreams. Not being able to escape from the visuals even in sleep proves that apart from the eyes, the brain also plays an important role in seeing the visuals. Visual components also dominate mass media. Except radio or audio medium, every medium is full of visuals. Be it print media or television or online medium. Mass media is full of visual components such as photographs, cartoons, illustrations, infographics, animations, paintings, videos, etc. In this unit we shall discuss the various aspects of visual communication.
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this unit you will be able to : * define visual communication; * understand the importance of visual communication; * enumerate the various tools of visual communication;

Digital Photography * explain the different theories of visual communication; and & Videography * describe the elements and principles of design.
5.2 VISUAL COMMUNICATION : AN
INTRODUCTION
When we use visual elements to communicate your message, it is called visual communication. In this section, we shall discuss the introductory aspects of visual communication.
5.3 What is Visual Communication
Visual communication is the use of images, symbols, graphics, and other visual elements to convey information, ideas, opinion and any type of messages to the audience. It is a broad term that includes a wide range of visual media, including photographs, illustrations, videos, diagrams, charts, graphs, animations, etc. Visual communication is an vital part of our daily lives and is used in a variety of fields including advertising, journalism, education, entertainment and the arts. It is a powerful tool for quickly and effectively communicating complex ideas and feelings, and can often communicate more efficiently than words alone. Visual communication can take many forms and can be used to communicate a wide variety of messages. For example, photograph or video may be used to evoke an emotional response or tell a story, while infographics may be used to convey complex data in a simple and easy-to-understand format. Overall, visual communication is a key component of effective communication and plays an important role in shaping our understanding of the world around us.
5.2.2 Visual Thinking
Visual thinking is a cognitive process that involves using visual elements such as images, diagrams, and other forms of visual representation to understand, process, and communicate information. This type of thinking can involve mental imagery or the use of external aids such as charts or diagrams. There are various techniques that can be used to facilitate visual thinking, including sketching, mind mapping, and flowcharting. By practicing visual thinking, individuals can improve their ability to think creatively and communicate effectively. Visual thinking is an important skill in many fields, including design, engineering, and education, as it allows individuals to better understand complex information and relationships by representing them in a more accessible format.
5.2.3 Different Tools of Visual Communication
In visual communication we communicate through visuals. These visuals can be created manually or by machines or by the combine efforts of human and machines. A painting or drawing made by hand is also a visual component and digital art created with the help of software also comes under the category of visual message. Visual messages can be of various types, such as photographs, videos, paintings, illustrations, cartoons, graphics, infographics, animations etc. Visuals can be created with the help of many tools. For example - manually by artists, cameras, graphic design software, presentation software, image editing

software, data visualization tools, video editing software, animation software, Intoduction to Visual web designing software etc. Communication It shows that there are many tools available for creating visuals to communicate desired messages. We can choose them according to our need.
5.2.4 How do we see ?
The vision process in humans is complex and consists of several stages. It requires coordination of eye and brain. This process includes the following steps: i. The light rays reflect from the object and enter the eye through the cornea. The cornea is the clear and protective outer layer of the eye. ii. Light rays pass through the pupil. The pupil is the opening in the center of the iris. The iris is the colored part of the eye that controls the amount of light entering the eye. iii. Eye lens focuses the light rays on the retina at the back of the eye and forms a real and inverted image of the object. This lens is located behind the iris. With the help of the ciliary muscles, the eye lens changes shape to adjust the focus of light depending on the distance of the object being viewed. iv. The retina detects light rays. The retina is a layer of cells at the back of the eye. It contains photoreceptor cells called rods and cones. These cells detect light signals and convert them into electrical signals. v. These electrical (converted from light) signals are then sent to the brain via the optic nerves. The brain interprets these signals as visual images, which are then processed and analyzed to provide information about the object being viewed, such as its color, size, motion etc. vi. Now visual information is processed in different areas of the brain, including the primary visual cortex. The primary visual cortex is responsible for processing basic visual information. The information is then sent to other relevant parts of the brain for higher level processing and use. Check Your Progress 1 Note 1) Use the space given below for your answer.
2) Compare your answer with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the tools that facilitate visual thinking ?

2. Explain the process of human vision.

Digital Photography 3. Rods and cones are available in & Videography a. Iris b. Cornea c. Retina d. Pupil
4. Ciliary muscles help in
a. Focusing the light b. Stopping the dust c. Analyzing the visuals d. Decoding the colours
5. Eye lens form real and inverted image of the object.
a. True b. False
5.3 THEORIES OF VISUAL COMMUNICATION
In this section we will talk about some fundamental but important theories of visual communication which help us to understand the whole process of vision and meaning creation. Visual communication theories can be generally classified into two broad categories - Sensual theories and Perceptual theories.
5.3.1 Sensual vs Perceptual Theories
Both sensual and perceptual theories of visual communication focus on how people interpret and understand visual information, but they approach the matter from different perspectives. Sensual theories of visual communication emphasize the role of sensory perception in how people perceive and interpret visual information. These theories suggest that visual communication involves more than the transmission of information through images or graphics, but also involves the senses and emotions of the audience. Examples of sensual theories include the Gestalt theory of perception, which emphasizes the importance of visual elements such as proximity, similarity, continuity, and common fate in creating a sense of wholeness and unity in visual communication. Perceptual theories of visual communication, on the other hand, focus on the cognitive and mental processes involved in the interpretation of visual information. These theories suggest that people interpret visual information by combining individual elements into larger, meaningful patterns. Overall, the main difference between sensual and perceptual theories of visual communication is that sensual theories emphasize the role of sensory perception and emotional response, whereas perceptual theories focus on the cognitive processes involved in interpreting visual information. Both types of theory are important to understanding how people interpret and understand visual information, and designers and communicators must take both into account when creating visual messages.

5.3.2 Sensual Theories Intoduction to Visual
Communication Sensual theories of visual communication emphasize the role of sensory perception in how people perceive and interpret visual information. These theories suggest that visual communication involves more than the transmission of information through images or graphics, but also involves the senses and emotions of the audience. Under the category of sensual theories of visual communication we will discuss two theories - Gestalt theory and Constructivism.
5.3.2.1 Gestalt Theory
Gestalt theory states that humans organize visual elements into groups and perceive them as a whole. According to Gestalt theory, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, and the brain tries to fill in the missing information to form a coherent and meaningful image. According to Gestalt theory, the individual elements within a design are combined and understood by the brain through the following principles: i. Similarity ii. Proximity iii. Continuity/Continuation iv. Common Fate Similarity: Objects that are similar in some way tend to be grouped together in a person's perceptual experience. This similarity may be based on a variety of characteristics, such as color, shape, size, texture, orientation, or other visual properties. According to Gestalt theory, our brains organize visual information into meaningful patterns or wholes, rather than perceiving individual elements in isolation. The principle of similarity states that when elements in a visual display share certain characteristics, our brains tend to group them as a single entity, or as part of a larger pattern or structure. For example (image 1), in a display of colored small circles, circles of the same color are treated as a group, while circles of different colors are treated as separate ones. Similarly, in the display of different shapes, shapes that are similar in shape, size, or orientation are treated as a single group, while dissimilar shapes are treated as separate (see image 2). (Image 1)

& Videography (Image 2) Using the principle of similarity, we can create visual displays that are both aesthetically pleasing and easy to interpret. By grouping similar elements together, we can create a sense of visual unity and coherence, while also emphasizing important elements and creating a clear visual hierarchy. Proximity: Proximity refers to the principle that objects that are close to each other are perceived as a group or unit. This means that when objects are placed near each other, they are perceived as being linked together and forming a comprehensible whole, even if they are not similar in shape, size, color or texture. The principle of proximity suggests that the human brain organizes visual information into groups based on their spatial relationships. This means that if several objects are placed close to each other, they are considered to belong to the same group, even if they differ in other ways. For example, if you see some small circles, the circles placed closer will be perceived as separate groups or units. Image-3 explains the principle of proximity. (Image 3) Proximity can be used in visual design to create a sense of organization and hierarchy. By placing related elements close to each other, we can create visual cues that help viewers understand how information is structured and related. Continuation/Continuity: Continuity/continuation is a principles that states that people perceive patterns and shapes as being continuous and flowing, even when they are interrupted or hidden. This means that when we see a series of elements arranged in a certain way, we naturally see them as a continuous line or curve, even if some elements are missing or unclear.

The principle of continuation/continuity suggests that the human brain seeks to Intoduction to Visual create a sense of order and coherence in the visual environment by arranging Communication visual elements into patterns that are perceived as continuous and smooth. This means that when elements are arranged in a certain way, our brain automatically completes the pattern and fills in any gaps or missing elements to create a sense of continuity. Continuity can be used in visual design to create a sense of flow and motion that guides a viewer's eye through a composition or layout. By using continuous lines or curves, we can create a sense of unity and cohesion in a design, and draw the viewer's attention to important elements or information. Muller-Lyer illusion : In this famous example (Image 4) of the illusion, both lines are the same length but the bottom line appears slightly longer. This can be explained by the principle of continuity of Gestalt theory. (Image 4) Common fate: The principle of common fate states that elements that move or change together are treated as a group or unit. This means that when objects or elements move in the same direction or change in the same way, we see them as belonging together and forming a coherent whole, regardless of whether they are connected physically or similar in appearance. This principle suggests that the human brain is sensitive to changes in the environment and is capable of perceiving patterns and relationships between visual elements based on their movement or behavior. This means that when objects move together, our brain interprets this as a sign that they are related and belong together. Common fate can be used in visual design to create a sense of unity and motion, guiding the viewer's eye through a composition or layout. By using elements that move or change together, we can create a sense of cohesion and coherence in a design, and draw the viewer's attention to important elements or information.
5.3.2.2 Constructivism
According to the critics of Gestalt Theory, the viewers were considered largely passive in this. Many psychologists have attempted to highlight the importance of the viewer's own mental state during the viewing process. According to constructivism, when one looks at any design, it is not just how the design is made that plays a role in the process. It emphasizes the importance of the viewer's active participation in constructing meaning from visual stimuli, rather than simply receiving it passively. The viewer has an important role. How his/her eyes are moving while looking at that design, what are the things in his/her memories, his/her experiences, his/her cultural background etc. all come together and complete the process of viewing and meaning creation. Julian Hochberg, a professor in psychology at Columbia University suggests that visual communication can be more effective when it takes into account the patterns of eye movements and fixations that occur during visual perception. 65

Digital Photography By strategically placing visual elements in the areas where the viewer is likely & Videography to fixate, we can guide the viewer's attention and create a more engaging and memorable visual experience. Hochberg used eye-tracking machines in visual perception experiments.
5.3.3 Perceptual Theories
Perceptual theories try to explain the process of understanding visuals through perceptual approach. They attempt to understand how a person interprets a visual. The main emphasis in these theories is not on the sensory process but on the perceptual process. We shall discuss semiotics under the category of perceptual theories of visual communication.
5.3.3.1 Semiotics
Semiotics is also called semiology. It is the science of signs that explains how meaning is created and expressed through different types of signs. Semiotics looks at the relationship between signs and their referents (the things they signify) as well as the signs themselves. It examines how signs are used to convey meaning, how they are interpreted by different people and cultures, and how they can be manipulated or transformed to create new meanings. Ferdinand de Saussure (1857-1913) a Swiss linguistic & Charles Sanders Peirce (1839-
1914) an American logician and philosopher are considered as the founders of
modern semiotics. Semiotics states that the universe is full of signs and a sign can have many meanings. Now the question arises, 'What is sign?' In semiotics, a sign is any object, gesture, sound, or image that stands for something else. We can understand it with the following examples : Example 1 This is a picture of a pen. This is not a real pen but it stands for a real pen. So, this picture will be considered as 'sign' when it stands for a real pen. Example 2 'PEN' is something that is made by combining lines. But it represents a tool that is used for writing. So, in this sense 'PEN' is a sign because it represents something else and that is a tool for writing. In semiotics, each sign has two inseparable components: signifier and signified. This concept was originally given by Ferdinand de Saussure. Signifier : The component of the sign which gives meaning. It is the physical form of the sign. It can be spoken words, written words, or even images. Signified : Signified is the concept or idea that is represented by the signifier. What idea or concept is coming in our mind after seeing that sign is called signified. Here, in this example, this image is signifier and the concept or idea of pen is signifier because when we see this image the idea of a tool used for writing comes in our mind.
Types of Signs
Charles Sanders Peirce classified signs into three different categories :

i. Icon/Iconic sign Intoduction to Visual Communication ii. Index/indexical sign iii. Symbol / symbolic sign i. Icon/Iconic sign : An icon is a type of sign that represents a physical similarity or resemblance. Or you can say that an icon is a sign that looks like or resembles what it is signifying. For example, a picture of a pen is an icon because it physically looks like a real pen. Similarly, a drawing of a bird is an icon because it is similar to the actual bird it represents. Icons are often used to convey a message quickly and easily because their resemblance to an object or concept is easily recognizable. ii. Index/indexical sign : An index is a sign that is directly connected to its referent through a causal relationship or evidence of existence. It means that an index is a sign that points to its referent by virtue of being caused by it or being physically connected to it in some way. We can understand it with the help of examples. Smoke is an index of fire because it is directly caused by fire. In the same way, tiger's pugmarks are an index of tiger's presence because they are physically connected to the tiger who made them. One more example, a skull and crossbones is an index of danger. It shows causal relationship. Dangerous things can kill us and turn us into skulls and bones. Indexes are a bit more complicated than the icons and take longer to interpret. Image 5 : An index for danger (causal relationship) iii. Symbol / symbolic sign : Symbols or symbolical signs are arbitrary. They have no logical connection with the things they represent. They carry coded meanings and one needs to learn these meanings to interpret or understand them. Symbols are arbitrary and culturally defined, which means that their meaning is determined by the shared understanding within a given society or culture. For example, the word "Mango" is a symbol in the English language that conventionally represents a certain type of fruit with a definite set of properties. People who do not know English can't understand the meaning of this symbolical sign. To extract the correct meaning of this symbol, one should have knowledge of English language, only then she/he can understand the coded meaning with the symbol 'Mango'. Another example is national flags. National flags are symbolical signs that represent the countries they belong to.

Digital Photography Check Your Progress 2
& Videography Note 1) Use the space given below for your answer.
2) Compare your answer with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is principle of proximity in Gestalt Theory of visual communication?

2. Explain the differences between icon and index.

5.4 ELEMENTS OF DESIGN
Design elements are the basic building blocks that we use to create visual compositions. These elements are: Line: Lines can be used to define shapes, create texture, and communicate movement. They can be straight or curved, thick or thin. We can use them to create a sense of depth or perspective. Shape: A shape is a two-dimensional form that is defined by its edges and boundaries. Shapes can be geometric (eg, triangle, rectangle, circle, square etc.) or natural (such as trees, flowers, rivers etc.). Colour: Colour is a powerful visual element for creating mood and emotion in a visual composition. We can use colours to convey meaning, highlight important information, or create contrast. Texture: Texture is the visual or tangible quality of a surface. We can use it to create contrast, depth or visual interest in a design. Space: Space refers to the area within and around a visual composition/design. You can use it to create balance, emphasis or depth in a composition. Form: Form is the three-dimensional equivalent of shape. It refers to the physical or visual mass of an object and we can use forms to convey contrast, depth, or emphasis. We can combine and manipulate these elements in a variety of ways to create effective and attractive designs in all fields of visual communication such as photography, graphic design, fashion design, website design, page design, interior design etc. We shall discuss these elements in more detail in the next unit titled 'Photographic Composition'.
5.5 PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN
The principles of design are a set of rules or guidelines that help us create effective visual compositions. Some important principles of the design are -
Unity, Emphasis, Balance, Contrast, Harmony, Proportion

Unity : A design is made up of several elements. The principle of unity says Intoduction to Visual that all the elements should come together to create a feeling of completeness. Communication The elements used in the composition should not appear scattered. Together, try to convey a message. A unified design will have elements that work together to create a cohesive whole. Emphasis : According to this principle, the design should be clear about what is most important. A design should be prepared in such a way that the viewer's eyes go there first. By using this principal we can fulfill the purpose of our design. For example, if in a print advertisement, we want the readers' eyes to go to the new offer given by the company, then we should design it in such a way that the offer is placed at the focal point of the advertisement. The focal point is the part of a design where the viewer's eye first goes. This can be achieved through the use of size, color, contrast or placement. An effective design should also have a clear visual hierarchy. A clear importance rating is necessary for a clear visual hierarchy. While designing anything, we should know that what is the order of importance of the things included in the design. That is, which thing is most important, which is second, which is third, etc. According to this order of importance, we also give visual weightage to those things. In this way, the viewers see that design according to the planning of the designer. And when it does, it is considered an effective design. Contrast : Contrast talks about the use of opposing elements in a design to create visual interest. For example, large and small sizes, black and white colours, thick and thin lines, opposite directions etc. Proportion: Proportion Refers to the relationship between the sizes of different elements in a design. Proportionate designs will have elements that are appropriately sized in relation to each other. Rhythm: This principle of design is the use of repeated patterns or elements to create a sense of flow, movement, and visual interest in a composition. Rhythm is a fundamental aspect of design. There are many ways to create rhythm in a design, including the use of repetition, alternation and progression. Repetition involves repeating a visual element, such as a shape, color or texture, at regular intervals. Alternation involves alternating two or more different visual elements, such as light and dark colors, to create a sense of movement and interest. Progression involves using a sequence of visual elements, such as increasing or decreasing the size of a shape, to create a sense of speed and direction. Harmony: The principle of harmony in design refers to the use of elements that work together to create a sense of unity, balance, and coherence in a design. Harmony is achieved when all the individual elements in a design complement and enhance each other, rather than competing for attention. There are many ways to create harmony in design. One approach is to use a cohesive color scheme, such as a monochromatic or similar color palette, which helps unify the different elements and create a cohesive look. Another approach is to use the same shape or pattern throughout the design, creating a sense of repetition and rhythm. Balance: Each element in a design/visual composition has a certain visual weight. Visual weight can be understood as the ability of a visual element to 69

Digital Photography attract the attention of viewers. Balance refers to the distribution of visual weight & Videography in a design. A balanced design will have equal or proportional visual weight on both sides. Designs can be symmetrically or asymmetrically balanced. We shall discuss this principle in more detail in the next chapter. Check Your Progress 3 Note 1) Use the space given below for your answer.
2) Compare your answer with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Describe any five elements of design.

2. Explain any three principles of design.

3. In a design, balance can be created
a. only symmetrically b. only asymmetrically c. symmetrically or asymmetrically
4. Contrast can be created by using large and small size shapes.
a. True b. False
5.6 LET US SUM UP
We all know that visuals are very important for us. A large amount of communication is done through visuals in every walk of life. Both the eye and the brain play an important role in seeing and making sense of visuals. In this unit, we have discussed various aspects of visual communication. We talked about some important theories of visual communication, various tools of visual communication and their utility. Apart from this, various elements and principles of design were also discussed in detail.
5.8 FURTHER READINGS
Davis, M., & Hunt, J. (2017). Visual communication design: An introduction to design concepts in everyday experience. Bloomsbury Publishing. Leborg, C. (2006). Visual Grammar: A Design Handbook (Visual Design Book for Designers, Book on Visual Communication). Princeton Architectural Press. Principles of Design : https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/process/ui-design/5- principles-design/

Intoduction to Visual
5.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Communication
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1
1. Various techniques can facilitate visual thinking, such as sketching,
mind mapping, flowcharting etc.
2. The vision process in humans is complex and consists of several stages.
It requires coordination of eye and brain. First, the light rays reflect from the object and enter the eye through the cornea and then pupil. These rays reach to eye lens which focuses the light on the retina and forms a real and inverted image of the object. The retina detects light and photoreceptor cells (rods and cones) convert light into electrical signals. These electrical signals (converted from light) are then sent to the brain via the optic nerves. The brain interprets these signals as visual images, which are then processed and analyzed to provide information about the object being viewed, such as its color, size, motion etc. Now visual information is processed in different areas of the brain, including the primary visual cortex. The primary visual cortex is responsible for processing basic visual information. The information is then sent to other relevant parts of the brain for higher level processing and use.
3. c. Retina
4. a. Focusing the light
5. a. True
Check Your Progress 2
1. Principle of proximity states that objects that are close to each other are
perceived as a group or unit. This means that when objects are placed near each other, they are perceived as being linked together and forming a comprehensible whole, even if they are not similar in shape, size, color or texture.
2. An icon is a type of sign that represents a physical similarity or
resemblance. Or you can say that an icon is a sign that looks like or resembles what it is signifying. For example, a picture of a pen is an icon because it physically looks like a real pen. On the other hand an index is a sign that is directly connected to its referent through a causal relationship or evidence of existence. It means that an index is a sign that points to its referent by virtue of being caused by it or being physically connected to it in some way. We can understand it with the help of examples. Smoke is an index of fire because it is directly caused by fire. In the same way, tiger's pugmarks are an index of tiger's presence because they are physically connected to the tiger who made them. Check Your Progress 3
1. Five elements of design are as follows :
i. Line: Lines can be used to define shapes, create texture, and communicate movement. They can be straight or curved, thick or thin. We can use 71

Digital Photography them to create a sense of depth or perspective. & Videography ii. Shape: A shape is a two-dimensional form that is defined by its edges and boundaries. Shapes can be geometric (eg, triangle, rectangle, circle, square etc.) or natural (such as trees, flowers, rivers etc.). iii. Form: Form is the three-dimensional equivalent of shape. It refers to the physical or visual mass of an object and we can use forms to convey contrast, depth, or emphasis. iv. Colour: Colour is a powerful visual element for creating mood and emotion in a visual composition. We can use colours to convey meaning, highlight important information, or create contrast. v. Space: Space refers to the area within and around a visual composition/ design. You can use it to create balance, emphasis or depth in a composition.
2. Three principles of design are following :
i. Principle of Emphasis : According to this principle, the design should be clear about what is most important. A design should be prepared in such a way that the viewer's eyes go there first. By using this principal we can fulfill the purpose of our design. For example, if in a print advertisement, we want the readers' eyes to go to the new offer given by the company, then we should design it in such a way that the offer is placed at the focal point of the advertisement. The focal point is the part of a design where the viewer's eye first goes. This can be achieved through the use of size, color, contrast or placement. ii. Principle of Balance: Each element in a design/visual composition has a certain visual weight. Visual weight can be understood as the ability of a visual element to attract the attention of viewers. Balance refers to the distribution of visual weight in a design. A balanced design will have equal or proportional visual weight on both sides. Designs can be symmetrically or asymmetrically balanced. We shall discuss this principle in more detail in the next chapter. iii. Principle of Unity : A design is made up of several elements. The principle of unity says that all the elements should come together to create a feeling of completeness. The elements used in the composition should not appear scattered. Together, try to convey a message. A unified design will have elements that work together to create a cohesive whole.
3. c. symmetrically or asymmetrically
4. a. True

UNIT 6: PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPOSITION
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 What is Picture Composition ?
6.3 Elements of Composition
6.3.1 Line
6.3.2 Shape
6.3.3 Form
6.3.4 Texture
6.3.5 Space
6.3.6 Colour
6.4 Rules of Composition
6.4.1 Content and Meaning
6.4.2 Emphasis
6.4.3 Rule of Thirds
6.4.4 Balance
6.4.5 Headroom and Lead room
6.4.6 Framing
6.4.7 Viewpoint
6.5 Let Us Sum Up
6.6 Further Readings
6.7 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
6.0 INTRODUCTION
In previous units, we discussed the structure of photographic cameras, their functioning and their different types. In photography, it is necessary to know the camera because it is the tool through which photographs are taken. Camera is important but content is the most important. Like every medium, in photography also, we want to convey a certain message to our receivers through photographs. Every photo taken has a purpose. It contains a message that the photographer wants to convey to his/her audience. A good photograph is one that effectively communicates the photographer's intended message to the viewers. A photographer composes his/her photograph according to the message that s/he wants to convey. Photograph is a visual medium and contains many elements. A good composition can be made by using all these elements properly. Hence, composition is a vital factor in photography. In this unit, we shall discuss various aspects of picture composition. Various elements and some key rules of composition will be discussed here in detail.

6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
& Videography After going through this Unit, you will be able to: * understand the importance of composition in photography; * explain the different elements of composition; * describe the key rules of composition; and * improve your photographic composition skills.
6.2 WHAT IS PICTURE COMPOSITION ?
What is the purpose of photography? Just like writing, painting and many other forms of expression, photography is also an art form used to express one's feelings, emotions, stories and messages. Photographers use this medium to express themselves. It is a tool of visual communication and has its own visual language. A good photographer should be the master of visual language. S/he must know the complete grammar of this language so that s/he can use it to convey his/her message properly. A photograph consists of several elements. It can have shapes, forms, space, colours, textures, sense of movement and many more. A photographer uses these elements creatively to tell his/her story effectively. In photography, composition is structuring a photograph by using various visual elements to convey the intended message effectively. In simple words, a photographer has many visual elements to structure a photograph, like - main subject/s, things of different shapes and sizes present in the foreground and background, space, colour, texture, etc. A picture is formed from these very elements. A photographer carefully arranges or combines these visual elements within a frame in such a way that s/he can get the best visual result and convey his/her message successfully. The arrangement of these elements to create an effective photograph is called composition. Changes in composition can also be done during post-production, but this work is mainly done at the time of clicking photographs. Before discussing composition further, we must clearly understand one thing that photographs can be both - unstaged and staged. Unstaged photographs are photographs whose visual elements were present in the same arrangement in real life at the time the photograph was taken. On the other hand in staged photographs, the photographer arranges various visual elements by himself or herself so that s/he can take a good photograph. Here, the photographer creates this arrangement for clicking photos only. Now we shall discuss the different elements of composition.
6.3 ELEMENTS OF COMPOSITION
As we discussed earlier, a photograph is formed by the combination of different visual elements. Different visual elements create different types of feelings, emotions and reactions in our minds and accordingly they are used to create the desired effects. It is necessary to know these elements. If we get to know these elements, we shall be able to use them better in composing our photographs. Here, we shall discuss some important composition elements.

7.3.1 Line Photographic
Composition We all know about line. It is one of the most fundamental elements of visual arts. If you observe, you will find this world filled with different types of lines. Different types of lines evoke different feelings in our mind and a good photographer can use them effectively in his/her composition. Lines are formed when boundaries emerge between different colours or tones. The strength of a line depends on the contrast between colours or tones. Lines can be explicit or implied. An implied line can be formed by the arrangement of different objects or suggested by motion within the frame. Lines can divide the frame or can connect different objects within the frame. Strong lines can be used to draw attention to certain subjects in a photograph. The general pattern of lines can create an interesting effect in a picture. Well-spaced parallel lines have the most calm and stable effects whereas multiple short lines angled in all directions evoke confusion, excitement, and chaos. Photographs with long, angled converging lines quickly attract our eyes to the point of convergence. We all are familiar with different types of lines, for example - horizontal lines, vertical lines, diagonal lines, curved lines, etc. These lines help to create different types of psychological effects and we can use these properties to compose effective photographs. Horizontal lines create a sense of tranquility, relaxation and gravity. Vertical perpendicular lines may show the feeling of grandeur. They can overpower adjacent horizontal lines. Combination of vertical (perpendicular) and horizontal lines provides the sense of stability and permanence. Diagonal lines indicate motion and instability. As far as curved lines are concerned, they also create different feelings. Soft and shallow curves carry pleasing and sensual qualities. They bring softening effects in composition. But, deep curves, angular or complicated lines create the sense of anger, stress and disorder.
Photo by Poonam Gaur
Figure 1: Curve line
6.3.2 Shape
Shape is more complex than a line. It has two dimensions - length and width. A shape is formed when a line or lines close off a certain area. Shapes help to

Digital Photography single out objects from their environment. If you observe, you will find different & Videography types of shapes around you. In photographic composition, the shapes may be real as well as implied. Sometimes a group of objects or shapes makes different shapes by their arrangements. Some common shapes are triangle, rectangle, square, circle, ellipse etc. Like all visual elements, shapes also have psychological meanings. Different shapes evoke different feelings. Therefore, we can use different shapes in our composition to create the desired effect on the minds of our viewers. Triangle is a dynamic and energetic shape. It conveys motion and direction, but the position of triangle can change its meaning. An upright triangle sitting on its base shows sense of balance and stability whereas a reverse triangle suggests risk and sense of tension. Rectangle and square shapes convey the feelings of stability, reliability, security and strength. Rectangle is considered comparatively more interesting than square. Round shapes like circle, oval and ellipses do not have angles so they create softness and mildness in the composition. They indicate eternity, completeness and mystery. Arrangement of objects in a circular shape also creates interest.
6.3.3 Form
Forms are three-dimensional shapes. Apart from length and width, they also have depth. For example - square is a shape which has only two dimensions. When a third dimension is added to a square, it will become a cube, a form. So, forms are shapes with volume. Three-dimensional forms can be shown in a two-dimensional photograph through tone gradation (shading). The common forms are - cube, cuboid, cylinder, sphere, cone, pyramid, etc. Our world is full of forms. If you observe properly, you will find many interesting forms around you even in your vegetable box. Try to see it from different point of views and many a time you can get very interesting photographs from ordinary and familiar forms. Check your progress: 1 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is composition in photography?

2. Differentiate between staged and unstaged photography.

3. Which of the following is not an element of composition ?
a. Line b. ISO

c. Form Photographic Composition d. Shape
4. An upright triangle sitting on its base shows a sense of
a. Stability b. Risk c. Tension d. Softness
5. Horizontal lines create the sense of
a. Confusion b. Chaos c. Tranquility d. Conflict
6.3.4 Texture
Texture is related to the quality of a surface. It suggests how we feel when we touch an object. It can be smooth, rough, sticky, furry, grainy, hard, soft and many more. There is a difference between the texture of the soft and tight skin of a child and the wrinkled skin of an old person. Similarly, there is a difference in the texture of the creamy surface of a cake and the texture of a broken wall. Texture can be used for many purposes in photography. Many times only capturing a texture can give you very interesting photographs. If you observe carefully, you will find many interesting textures in nature. In photography, textures can be used to create visual interest, to balance the composition visually, and to create contrast in the picture. Image Source: Photo by Rajesh Misra (License: CC0 Public Domain) https://www.publicdomainpictures.net/ pictures/280000/velka/rock-texture-1.jpg Figure 2: Rock texture
6.3.5 Space
Space in a photographic composition can be classified into two types - positive and negative space. Generally, positive space is an area that has relatively 77

Digital Photography higher visual weight in any composition, and the space around a positive space & Videography can be called negative space. We can understand it with an example. Just take an example of the following picture (figure no. -3). In this picture, the space covered by the flower is positive space while the rest of the background is negative space.
Photo by Poonam Gaur
Figure 3: Positive and negative space Space can be used creatively to make an effective composition. The relative proportion of positive and negative spaces may change the feeling of the photograph. A tiny positive space with a lot of negative space may create a sense of isolation or vastness. Think about a picture of a small island in a vast sea. Here, the island will be considered as positive space and seawater as negative space. If the size of the island is very small in the composition, it shows the isolation of that island and immensity of the sea. But, if we increase the size of the island in the frame, it will change the proportion of positive and negative spaces and in turn the feel of the photograph may change. Sufficient negative space also provides rest to the eyes and gives a feeling of relaxation.
6.3.6 Colour
Colour is another important element for all visual arts including photography. Colours play an important role in determining the emphasis and mood of a composition. With the help of colours, you can decide the direction of eye movement of the viewer in a picture. Changing tone value of the colour creates the visual perception of distance. Colours also have psychological meanings. The creative use of colours is an important tool for producing an attractive composition and if you want to get command on this tool, you should know the various properties of this element.
Properties of Colour
There are three main properties of colour- Hue, Value and Intensity. Hue: Hue refers to the colour itself. It is the name of a colour, like - red, blue, green, etc.

Value: Value refers to darkness or lightness of a colour. We can get darker Photographic colours by adding black whereas lighter colours can be produced by adding Composition white. Tints and shades carry different values of a colour. i. Tint : By mixing white in any colour, we can get different tints of that particular colour. For example, take the red colour. Now, by mixing different amounts of white with red, we can create different tints of the red. These tints will be lighter than the original red. ii. Shade: Shades are the opposite of tints. You can get different shades of any Colour by mixing black to it. If we mix different amounts of black in red, we shall get different shades of red. Shades are darker than the original colour. Intensity or Chroma: Intensity refers to the saturation or purity of the colour. We can change the intensity of any colour by mixing it with grey or its complementary colour (opposite to it on colour wheel).
Colour Models
There are two important colour models: i. Additive Colour model ii. Subtractive Colour model i. Additive Colour model: In this colour model, Red, Green & Blue (RGB) are the primary colours. If we combine the light beams of Red, Green and Blue in equal parts, we get the White. Here, all the colours are created by using the primary colours, RGB. In all cases where we see emitted light, additive colour model is used. For example - television monitors, computer monitors, phone screens, tablet screen, etc. By SharkD at English WikipediaLater versions were uploaded by Jacobolus at en.wikipedia. - Transferred from en.wikipedia to Commons., Public Domain, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index. php?curid=2529435 (Figure 4: Primary colours of additive colour model) When we add two primary colours of this model, we get secondary colours. It is a noticeable fact that these secondary colours work as primary colours in Subtractive Colour Model.

Digital Photography Red + Green = Yellow & Videography Red + Blue = Magenta Blue + Green = Cyan ii. Subtractive Colour model : In this colour model, Cyan, Magenta and Yellow are the primary colours. When we mix these colours in equal parts, we get the Black. This colour model is used in the cases where we see the reflected light. For example - printed material, painting, etc. Image source: By SharkD - Own work, CC0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=57505814 Figure 5: Primary colours of additive colour model We can get secondary colours of this model by mixing the primary colours. Secondary colours of this model work as primary colours of Additive colour model. Yellow + Magenta = Red Yellow + Cyan = Green Magenta + Cyan = Blue
Warm and Cool Colours
Colours can also be divided into two categories - warm and cool colours. Yellow, orange and red are considered warm colors, while blue, green and violet as cool colors. Warm colors are active, aggressive and create a feeling of warmth while cool colors are considered receding and passive. They evoke cool feelings and remind us of cool things like water, grass, etc.
Colour Wheel
It is a wheel on which colours are arranged in a circular manner. This wheel helps us to understand the relationships and interaction between colours. The first such wheel was created by the famous scientist Sir Isaac Newton in 1666. He created the colour wheel to explain that the white light is a combination of seven different colours. Thus his colour wheel had seven colours. After that many versions of colour wheel have emerged. At present the most popular colour wheel carries 12 colours.
Colour Schemes
Colour scheme refers to the combination of colours in a composition. Different colours interact with each other and create different effects. So, a combination of colours can be used to create the desired mood and effects in a photograph.
80 Various colour schemes can be created with the help of colour wheel. Here we
shall discuss a few important colour schemes.

i. Monochromatic Colour Scheme: This colour scheme is based on single Photographic hue/colour. In this scheme, different tints, shades and tones of the same Composition colour are used. It gives an elegant and clean composition which is soothing and pleasant to the eyes. Example -A picture of a woman in a blue gown standing in a room and all the furniture, curtains and things in that room are of blue colour (different shades, tints and tones of blue). ii. Complementary Colour Scheme: This scheme uses combination of the complementary colours. The colours which are opposite to each other on colour wheel are called complementary colours. The interaction between complementary colours creates a great contrast, so these colours are also called contrast colours. For example, in traditional RBY colour wheel, Red and Green, Blue and Orange, Yellow and Violet were considered as the complementary colours. But in modern colour wheel, Red and Cyan, Green and Magenta, Blue and Yellow are used as complementary colours. Contrast is the key feature of this colour scheme which attracts the viewers' attention. Example - The photograph of a red flower with the green background of the leaves.
Photo by Poonam Gaur
Figure 6: Complementary colour scheme iii. Analogous Colour Scheme: In this colour scheme, we use a combination of colours which are placed adjacent to each other on colour wheel. This scheme creates calm and pleasant effects. You can find many examples of this colour scheme in nature. Following image (figure - 7) is an example of analogous colour scheme.
Photo by Poonam Gaur
Figure 7: Analogous colour scheme

Digital Photography iv. Triadic Colour Scheme: This colour scheme uses three colours evenly & Videography placed on the colour wheel like - red-yellow-blue, orange-green-violet, etc. Triadic scheme is vibrant but not very aggressive. Activity 1 Try to compose two photographs, one with complementary colour scheme and another with analogous colour scheme. Show them to any five persons and record their feelings and views on both the photograph. Analyse the recorded data and write it down to highlight the differences between complementary colour scheme and analogous colour scheme. Check your progress: 2 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How is the Additive colour model different from the Subtractive model?

2. Define positive and negative space.

3. Which of the following is not a primary colour in Additive colour model?
a. Red b. Green c. Yellow d. Blue Table: 4. Different tints of a colour can be created by mixing, with that colour. a. Black b. White c. Red d. Blue
5. Which of the following is a warm colour ?
a. Blue b. Red c. Green d. Violet

Photographic
6.4 RULES OF COMPOSITION
Composition The rules of composition generally apply to all types of visual arts and photography is one of them. The main objective of these rules is to help to compose such photographs which can convey the intended messages effectively to the audience. In this section, we shall discuss some of the important rules of photographic composition.
6.4.1 Content and Meaning
This is the most basic but very significant rule of composition. We should compose a photograph in such a way that it can convey the intended meaning successfully. Every photograph has two basic components - Content and Visual Appearance. Content is related to the message or meaning a photographer wants to convey through his/her picture. If a photograph is visually very attractive but is not able to convey the message that the photographer wants, then it cannot be called a good composition. Let us understand it with a simple example. Suppose you got the opportunity to speak as a guest speaker at a major function of a prestigious institution. The photographer took a picture of the occasion. The picture looks quite nice visually. The lighting is good, the camera angle is also good and your personality also comes out strongly and attractively in the picture. But it is not possible to know from the picture where or in which programme you are speaking. Can the composition of this picture be considered good? Certainly not, because the purpose of this picture was to show that you were speaking in a big programme of a very reputed institution, but the picture does not tell anything about the institution or programme. While composing this picture, it was necessary to be kept in mind that we should include something in the frame to show where the person is speaking. It could have a background banner, an institution logo on the podium or something else to establish where you are speaking. From this simple example, we can understand that before pressing the shutter button of the camera, we must think whether this composition will fully convey the intended meaning of this photograph or not. In photography, meaning can be created in different ways. The facial expressions of the subject/s can create meaning. We can also create certain meanings by arranging subjects/objects or composition elements in different ways in the frame. For example, if we place two individuals together, one very poor and malnourished and one rich and overweight, then it depicts the sense of inequality in society.
6.4.2 Emphasis
A photograph has many elements and there is a conceptual hierarchy among them. It means that for conveying the intended message effectively, different elements have different levels of importance. Generally, there is one main element on which we want to draw the attention of our viewers most. Other elements of that picture supplement or support the main element. So, the principle of emphasis says that the conceptual hierarchy should match the visual hierarchy because the movement of our eyes follows the visual hierarchy. We should keep the main element of the photograph at the point of the strongest emphasis or the centre of interest. Visual weight plays crucial role in creating emphasis in a composition. The different elements of composition have different visual weight. For example, 83

Digital Photography darker colours have more visual weight than the lighter colours, bigger shapes & Videography have more visual weight than smaller shapes, positive space has more visual weight than negative space, etc. An area with the maximum visual weight will be the area of the strongest emphasis or centre of interest in a composition. Generally, we should not have more than one centre of interest or point of emphasis in our composition. It may create confusion for the viewer but many times we break this rule with certain purposes. There are different guidelines or rules to create correct emphasis in composition and these are based on human psychology. Rule of Thirds is one of the most popular emphasis rules. We shall discuss this rule in coming sub-section.
6.4.3 Rule of Thirds
Rule of Thirds is a very popular rule of photographic composition. First, divide the whole frame into three equal vertical and horizontal sections with the help of two equally spaced vertical and two horizontal lines. Now the whole frame has nine equal parts and four intersection points. These intersection points are points of interest. The following image (figure no. 8) explains it. (Figure 8) According to the Rule of Thirds, to get a good composition, you should follow the guidelines given below.
- While composing a picture, imaginarily divide your frame into nine
equal parts as described above. Many cameras have feature of enabling Rule of Thirds grid overlay. You can use it. It will help you to place your composition elements according to this rule.
- You should place your main composition elements along these dividing
lines or intersection points.
- If your composition has strong horizontal line, do not place it in the
middle of the frame. It will divide the frame into two equal parts which will create less interesting visual appeal. Place this horizontal line along any horizontal dividing lines of the grid of Rule of Thirds (either 1/3rd or 2/3rd of the frame).
- If your composition has strong vertical line, do not place it in the middle
of the frame. It will divide the frame into two equal parts which will create less interesting visual appeal. Place this vertical line along any vertical dividing lines of the grid of Rule of Thirds (either 1/3rd or 2/3rd of the frame). Image no. 3, 6 and 7 follow the Rule of Thirds.

6.4.4 Balance Photographic
Composition A photographic composition should be visually balanced. As a photographer, you should distribute the visual weight across the frame in such a way that the entire composition looks balanced and complete. You are familiar with the term 'Visual Weight'. We have discussed this term in the previous section. It is the perceived weight of a visual element that provides the ability to attract the viewer's eye and attention. You can balance your composition in various ways. Here, we will discuss few important types of balance. Symmetrical Balance: In symmetric balance, we place equal visual weights at equal distances on both sides of the balancing point or axis and the balancing point lies in the middle of the frame. The following image (figure no. 9) explains the symmetrical balance. (Figure 9) Symmetrical balance looks quite formal so it is also called formal balance. This type of balance is relatively less interesting but can sometimes give excellent compositions. Following picture is an example of symmetrical balance. Photo by Devansh Goel / CC BY-SA (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0) https://commons.wikimedia. org/wiki/File:Qutb_Minar-_Symmetry.JPG Figure 10: Symmetrical balance Asymmetrical Balance: Obtaining asymmetrical balance in a photographic composition is comparatively difficult but gives interesting and dynamic compositions. Here, we do not place the same visual weight on both sides. We try to balance visually heavy elements with lighter ones. The following image (figure-11) shows the concept of asymmetrical balance. 85

& Videography (Figure 11 ) You should try to balance your compositions asymmetrically. It will make your photographs more interesting and energetic. You can also apply the Rule of Thirds to achieve this balance. Figure 3, 6 & 7 are the examples of asymmetrical balance.
6.4.5 Headroom and Lead room
Headroom and lead room are two important factors in photographic composition. In this sub-section we shall discuss about them. Headroom: The distance between the subject's top and top of the frame is called headroom. You should keep proper headroom while composing any subject. Too much headroom and no headroom, both should be avoided. Both are not proper and do not look natural. Following pictures (figure no. 12) explain the rule of proper headroom in a photographic composition.
Photo by Amit Kumar
Figure 12: Headroom Lead room: In good composition, we should leave proper space in the direction in which the subject is moving or facing. This space is called lead room or nose room or looking space. Psychologically viewers want to see proper lead room in any composition. You can also apply the Rule of Thirds to set proper lead

room in your composition. Following pictures (figure no. 13) demonstrate the Photographic concept of proper lead room. Composition
Photo by Amit Kumar
Figure 13: Lead room
6.4.6 Framing:
Framing helps to highlight the framed subject in a photographic composition. We can use different elements of our composition to create a frame within the frame. For example, we can capture a bird through the natural frame of tree branches. Curtains, tunnels, arches, windows, doors, the gap between the rocks and many more can be used to create a frame within the frame. Using this framing technique, we can add a sense of depth to our photograph and also highlight the framed subject. Following image (figure no 14) is an example of this types of framing.
Photo by Poonam Gaur
Figure 14: Framing
6.4.7 Viewpoint
Viewpoint plays a very important role in photographic composition. It refers to the position of the camera lens in relation to the captured subject/s. As a photographer you should look at your subject from different angles and then

Digital Photography decide the right viewpoint to shoot. You can get very interesting pictures of & Videography common things by changing your point of view. By changing the camera angle, you can change the viewpoint and as a result, perspective will also change. You can try to click pictures of the same subject from different angles, such as - eye level, low angle, high angle, bird's eye angle, worm's eye angle, etc. You will get different results every time. We will discuss all these angles in detail in other units. So, always try to see and shoot your subject from different points of view, you will get interesting results.
6.5 LET US SUM UP
Composing a photograph is a creative work and we cannot restrict it to the boundaries of certain rules. In creative fields, the best rule is 'no rule'. You can break the rules but before that, you must know and master the rules. The same thing is applicable to photographic composition. The rules of composition are based on human psychology and give good results. In this unit, we discussed the main elements and fundamental rules of photographic composition. If you want to be a good photographer, just pointing and shooting is not enough. Your every click should be thoughtful. Activity 2 Compose four photographs using the Rule of Thirds. Check your progress: 3 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain Rule of Thirds.

2. How is symmetrical balance different from asymmetrical balance ?

3. What is visual weight ?

4. If your composition has a strong horizontal line, you should place it in
the middle of the frame. a. True b. False

Table: 5. In Rule of Thirds, the whole frame has, equal parts and, Photographic intersection points. Composition a. 8, 4 b. 9, 4 c. 9, 3 d. 4, 4
6.6 FURTHER READINGS
Duchemin, D. (2015). The Visual Toolbox: 60 Lessons for Stronger Photographs. Pearson Education. Freeman, M. (2007). The photographer's eye: composition and design for better digital photos. CRC Press. Langford, M., Fox, A., & Smith, R. S. (2013). Langfords basic photography: the guide for serious photographers. Amsterdam: Focal Press/Elsevier.
6.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check your progress: 1
1. A photographer has many visual elements to structure a photograph,
like - main subject/s, things of different shapes and sizes present in the foreground and background, space, colour, texture, etc. A picture is formed from these very elements. A photographer carefully arranges or combines these visual elements within a frame in such a way that s/he can get the best visual result and convey his/her message successfully. The arrangement of these elements to create an effective photograph is called composition.
2. Unstaged photographs are photographs whose visual elements were
present in the same arrangement in real life at the time the photograph was taken. On the other hand, in staged photographs, the photographer arranges various visual elements by himself or herself so that s/he can take a good photograph. Here, the photographer creates this arrangement for clicking photos only.
3. b. ISO
4. a. Stability
5. c. Tranquility
Check your progress: 2
1. In Additive Colour model, Red, Green & Blue (RGB) are the primary
colours. If we combine the light beams of Red, Green and Blue in equal parts, we get White. Here, all the colours are created by using the primary colours, RGB. In all cases where we see emitted light, additive colour model is used. For example - television monitors, computer monitors, phone screens, tablet screen, etc. When we add two primary colours of this model, we get secondary colours. It is a noticeable fact that these secondary colours work as primary colours in Subtractive Colour Model.

Digital Photography In Subtractive Colour model, Cyan, Magenta and Yellow are the primary & Videography colours. When we mix these colours in equal parts, we get the Black. This colour model is used in the cases where we see the reflected light. For example - printed material, painting, etc. We can get secondary colours of this model by mixing the primaries. Secondary colours of this model work as primary colours of Additive colour model.
2. Positive space is an area that has relatively higher visual weight in any
composition, and the space around a positive space can be called negative space. Think about a picture of a small island in a vast sea. Here island will be considered as positive space and seawater as negative space.
3. c. Yellow
4. b. White
5. b. Red
Check your progress: 3
1. Rule of Thirds is a very popular rule of photographic composition. First,
divide the whole frame into three equal vertical and horizontal sections with the help of two equally spaced vertical and two horizontal lines. Now the whole frame has nine equal parts and four intersection points. These intersection points are points of interest. You should place your main composition elements along these dividing lines or intersection points.
2. In symmetric balance, we place equal visual weights at equal distances
on both sides of the balancing point or axis and the balancing point lies in the middle of the frame. Symmetrical balance looks quite formal so it is also called formal balance. This type of balance is relatively less interesting but can sometimes give excellent compositions. In asymmetrical balance, we do not place the same visual weight on both sides. We try to balance visually heavy elements with lighter ones. Achieving asymmetrical balance in a photographic composition is comparatively difficult but gives interesting and dynamic compositions.
3. It is the perceived weight of a visual element that provides the ability to
attract the viewer's eye and attention. Visual weight plays crucial role in photographic composition. The different elements of composition have different visual weight. For example, darker colours have more visual weight than the lighter colours, bigger shapes have more visual weight than smaller shapes, positive space has more visual weight than negative space, etc.
4. b. False
5. b. 9, 4

UNIT 7: PHOTOGRAPHY TECHNIQUES
Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 Exposure
7.2.1 Exposure Triangle
7.3 Depth of Field
7.4 Aperture
7.4.1 Aperture and Exposure
7.4.2 Aperture and Depth of Field
7.5 Shutter Speed
7.5.1 Shutter Speed and Exposure
7.5.2 Shutter Speed and Motion
7.5.3 Creative Use of Shutter Speed
7.6 Let Us Sum Up
7.7 Further Readings
7.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
In the previous units, we discussed the different types of cameras, their structure, functioning and composition. In this unit we shall discuss some techniques of photography. Aperture, shutter speed and ISO play important roles in photography. By using these, we can click different types of photographs. Exposure and Depth of Field will also be discussed in detail in this unit. Understanding the interrelations between aperture, shutter speed and ISO and knowing their uses is important for good photography. We shall see how the required results in photographs can be achieved from different settings of aperture, shutter speed and ISO. Good photography mainly has two requirements: creative thinking and knowledge of techniques. With the combination of these two, we can do better in the art of photography.
7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this Unit, you will be able to: * understand Exposure and Exposure Triangle; * describe Depth of Field in photography; * explain the role of aperture, shutter speed and ISO in photography; and * improve your photography skills.

7.2 EXPOSURE
& Videography We know that in photography, reflected light from an object reaches a light sensitive plate through the camera lens and forms an image of that object there. Earlier photographic film was used as the light sensitive plate, but now an image sensor is used instead. Therefore, in photography, the image is recorded as light signals only. Digital cameras also record the image as light signals first, then the image sensor converts those light signals into electronic signals. Hence, it is clear that light is the base of photography. Exposure is also related to light itself. In simple words, the exposure is the amount of light that reaches the image sensor through the camera lens while taking the picture. The longer the image sensor of the camera is open for light to come in, the greater the amount of light that will reach inside. Exposure also depends on many other things which we will discuss later. This amount of light should always be appropriate, i.e. neither more than required nor less than required. When the amount of light in a photograph exceeds the requirement, we call it overexposed and if the amount of light is less than the required, it is called underexposed. Now the question arises that how should the correct exposure be determined? It is difficult to give one correct answer to this question. Although it can be said that the right exposure is one that is very close to reality, but sometimes photographers may use the exposure creatively as well. They may deliberately keep the exposure different from the reality. Most cameras have inbuilt light meters. When you point the camera towards the subject, the light reflected from the subject comes inside through the lens and the light meter measures its intensity. With the help of this light meter you can find the exposure level on a scale. That is why it is also called exposure meter. So before clicking, the photographer knows the level of the exposure and can make necessary changes in it.
7.2.1 Exposure Triangle
After understanding the exposure, you will definitely want to know how to control it. In photography, exposure is controlled by the following three things or variables: i. ISO ii. Aperture iii. Shutter speed These three things together form the Exposure Triangle. We shall discuss these three things in some detail now.

Techniques
By Amit Kumar
Figure 1: Exposure triangle i. ISO: ISO is an abbreviation for International Standard Organization. In the context of photography, this is the unit of light sensitivity of a photographic film or image sensor which is accepted all over the world. First, we shall try to briefly understand light sensitivity. Light sensitivity means sensitivity towards light. The thing which is more light sensitive can give better output by getting relatively less amount of light. ISO is denoted by numbers in photography. For example 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600 etc. As the ISO number increases, the light sensitivity also increases. If in case - A, ISO is 100 and in case - B, ISO is 200, then in case B the light sensitivity of the image sensor is twice that of case A. Now we shall try to understand the interrelationship between ISO and exposure. How does ISO affect exposure? To know the answer of this question, see the three pictures below.
By Amit Kumar
Figure 2, ISO = 100

& Videography
By Amit Kumar
Figure 3, ISO = 400
By Amit Kumar
Figure 4, ISO = 800 In the first photograph, ISO is 100, in the second it is 400 and in the third 800. All the three photographs have been taken in the same light condition and the rest of the factors affecting the exposure (aperture and shutter speed) have also been kept constant. We can clearly see that as the ISO increases, the amount of light in the pictures also increases. So it is clear that if ISO is increased then the exposure i.e. the amount of light in the picture will also increase and if ISO is reduced then the exposure i.e. the amount of light in the picture will also decrease. After understanding the interrelationship between exposure and ISO, now it is necessary to discuss the remaining two elements of the exposure triangle. These are aperture and shutter speed. But we will discuss their interrelationships with exposure later. In this unit, there are two separate sections dedicated to aperture and shutter speed, where both of them are discussed in detail. The interrelationships between these and exposure will also be discussed in the same sections.

Activity 1 Techniques Put the camera in manual mode. Take four photographs of the same subject with ISO 100, 200, 400 and 800. Keep the aperture and shutter speed constant in all photographs. Compare all four pictures and write your observations. This activity can also be done with smartphone cameras. Many of these cameras have manual or pro mode. If manual or pro mode is not available, then the help of camera apps may be taken. Check your progress: 1 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is exposure in photography?

2. What are the three elements of Exposure Triangle?

3. In which one of the following cases the image sensor has the highest
light sensitivity? a. ISO - 100 b. ISO - 200 c. ISO - 400 d. ISO - 800
4. Which of the following is false?
a. If ISO is increased, exposure also increases. b. W hile clicking photographs in low light condition, you can increase ISO. c. If ISO is increased, exposure decreases. d. ISO is linked with light sensitivity of the image sensor.
7.3 DEPTH OF FIELD (DOF)
Depth of field (DOF) is an important feature in photography and it is necessary for you to understand it. As the name of this term suggests, it talks about the depth of the field. In simple words, depth of field is the depth of an area of a photograph which is in focus. It means, the distance between the nearest and farthest points of the area of the photograph which is in focus. Now the question is what does it mean for an area of the photograph to be in focus? The area of a photograph that is with reasonably sharp details is called in focus. With the help

Digital Photography of the pictures given below, we can easily understand the depth of field. & Videography
By Poonam Gaur
Figure 5: Shallow depth of field
By Poonam Gaur
Figure 6: Deep depth of field The above pictures clearly show that the depth of field in figure no. 5 is lesser than that of figure no. 6. The following three factors mainly affect the depth of field: i. Distance between subject and lens ii. Focal Length of the lens iii. Aperture i. Distance between subject and lens and DOF: If everything else is constant then the depth of field will increase as distance between subject and camera lens increases. And following the same relationship, if the distance between the subject and the lens is reduced, the depth of field will also decrease.

ii. Focal length of the lens and DOF: The focal length of the camera lens Photography also affects the depth of field. If the focal length increases, the depth of Techniques field will decrease and if the focal length of the lens decreases, the depth of field will increase. For example: if the rest of the factors are kept constant then the depth of field of the photograph taken with a lens of 50 mm focal length will be greater than the photograph clicked with a lens of 100mm. iii. Aperture and DOF: Aperture is also one of the important factors that affects depth of field. But how it affects the depth of field will be discussed in the next section. The next section is completely focused on aperture. Aperture and its role in photography will be discussed in this section. The effect of aperture on depth of field will also be discussed there in detail. Check your progress: 2 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the term 'Depth of Field'.

2. Name the factors which affect depth of field in photography.

3. How does focal length influence depth of field?

7.4 APERTURE
Aperture is a hole or opening of the lens through which light enters the camera. You can change its size. It can be increased or decreased. If you increase its size then more amount of light will enter the camera and if it is reduced then relatively less light rays will be able to enter the camera. The entire amount of light falling on the outer surface of the lens does not cross the lens and go inside the camera. The amount of light that will be able to cross the lens is determined by the size of the aperture itself. The diagram below shows the functioning of a digital camera and we can also get a little clarity on the role of aperture from it.

& Videography
By Amit Kumar
Figure 7 : Functioning of a digital camera The size of the aperture is denoted by f-numbers or f-stops. For example: f/1.4, f/2, f/2.8, etc. Here, we should always keep one thing in mind that if the f-number is increasing, it means that the size of the aperture is decreasing. For example: If you compare f /22 and f/8, the aperture size of f/22 will be lesser than that of f/8. The diagram below illustrates this.
By Amit Kumar
Figure 8 : Aperture From this diagram it is completely clear that when the f-number increases, the size of the aperture decreases. Actually this f-number is based on the following formula: f-number = lens focal length / effective aperture diameter If we look at this formula carefully, we will find that f/2 means that we have set the diameter of the aperture to half of the focal length of the lens. Similarly, f /4 means that the diameter of the aperture is one fourth of the focal length of the lens. This formula makes it clear why the size of the aperture decreases as the f-number increases.
7.4.1 Aperture and Exposure
During the discussion on the exposure triangle, we saw that aperture also affects the exposure. As we know, the aperture is the opening of the lens through which

light comes in, so it is clear that the larger this opening, more will be the light Photography that comes in. Now we can easily understand the relation between aperture and Techniques exposure. If size of aperture increases, the amount of light inside the camera will also increase and as a result exposure will increase too. On the other hand, if size of aperture decreases, exposure will also decrease. But here, we should not be confused with f-number and aperture size. We have made it clear that the size of aperture increases as f-number decreases. You will get complete clarity on the relationship between aperture and exposure with the help of following pictures.
By Poonam Gaur
(Figure 9 , Aperture = f/16)
By Poonam Gaur
(Figure 10, Aperture = f/11)

& Videography
By Poonam Gaur
(Figure 11, Aperture = f/5.6) These three pictures make it clear that as the size of the aperture is increased (f-number decreased), the exposure also gets increased. Therefore, it is clear that the size of the aperture can be increased to increase the amount of light in the photograph. Lenses of different focal lengths may have different maximum and minimum apertures. In many zoom lenses, you can see that changing the focal length changes the maximum aperture.
8.4.2 Aperture and Depth of Field
Aperture also affects the depth of field. The depth of field reduces when the size of the aperture increases (the f-number decreases). Similarly, the depth of field increases when the size of the aperture decreases (f-number increases). You can understand the relationship between the aperture and depth of field more clearly with the help of pictures given below.
100 By Poonam Gaur
(Figure 12, Aperture = f/5.6)

Techniques
By Poonam Gaur
(Figure 13, Aperture = f/16) You can see that in figure-12 the size of aperture is larger than the figure-13 and as a result the depth of field is lesser. These examples support the above mentioned relationship between aperture and depth of field. Check your progress: 3 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is aperture?

2. Discuss the relationship between the size of aperture and f-numbers.

3. How does aperture affect exposure?

4. In which of the following cases, the aperture size is maximum ?
a. f / 1.4 b. f / 2.8 c. f / 22 d. f / 5.6

Digital Photography 7.5 SHUTTER SPEED
& Videography See the figure-7 carefully. This diagram explains the functioning of digital cameras. In this, you can see that there is a part called shutter before the image sensor. This shutter is like a curtain in front of the image sensor and opens only when the shutter button of the camera is pressed. As soon as the shutter button of the camera is pressed, this shutter opens for a certain period of time and the rays of light coming through the lens's aperture reach the image sensor and form the image. Then this shutter closes and the light rays stop reaching the image sensor. It means that the rays of light reach the image sensor only for the time that the shutter remains open. This is called Exposure Time. After discussing the shutter, now we come to the shutter speed. The speed with which the shutter opens and closes is known as the shutter speed. So, if the shutter speed is high, the shutter will remain open for a shorter time and the exposure time will be less. On the other hand, if the shutter speed is slow, the shutter will remain open for longer time and the exposure time will also be longer. Shutter speed is measured in second and fraction of a second. For example : 4, 5, 1/10, 1/125, 1/4000, etc. If the shutter speed is 4, it means shutter will be open for 4 seconds for exposure. 1/10 means shutter will be open for 10th part of a second or 0.1 second and 1/4000 means shutter will be open only for 4000th part of one second.
7.5.1 Shutter Speed and Exposure
During the discussion on Exposure Triangle, we saw that shutter speed also affects exposure. Shutter speed determines how long the shutter will remain open, and as long as the shutter will remain open, the rays of light will reach the image sensor. Therefore, it is clear that if shutter is open for a longer time, the exposure will be more. And the shutter will remain open for a longer time only when the shutter speed is slow. So if the shutter speed is slow, the exposure will be high and if the shutter speed is fast, the exposure will be less. The following pictures explain the relationship between shutter speed and exposure.
By Amit Kumar
Figure 14, Shutter speed = 1/20 sec

Techniques
By Amit Kumar
Figure 15, Shutter speed = 1/60 sec
By Amit Kumar
Figure 16, Shutter speed = 1/100 sec Look at the above three pictures carefully. The shutter speed in figure- 14 is the slowest (1/20). Here the shutter was open for twentieth part of a second. The shutter speed in the second image (figure no. - 15) is higher and the shutter speed in image- 16 is the highest (1/100). These pictures show that as the shutter speed increased, the amount of light in the pictures decreased, that is, the exposure decreased. Exposure in figure - 14 is quite high and due to which details are lost. The shape of the flame of the lamp is not visible. Increasing the shutter speed reduced the exposure slightly in figure -15 and led to more details being seen. Increasing the shutter speed further reduced the exposure in figure -16 and improved the details. Relationship between shutter speed and aperture in the context of exposure: In the exposure triangle, we discussed that aperture, shutter speed and ISO all three elements affect the exposure. These three elements can be controlled to get the right exposure. In the context of exposure, there is a very simple relationship between shutter speed and aperture that can be easily understood. If the size of the aperture is increased, the shutter speed will also have to be increased. Suppose you have to achieve a particular level of exposure and you have achieved it by a specific combination of aperture, shutter speed and ISO.

Digital Photography Now, if for some reason you have to increase the size of the aperture, then to & Videography maintain the previous level of exposure, you will have to increase the shutter speed also.
8.5.2 Shutter Speed and Motion
Still photographs cannot have motion, but feeling of motion can be created. A picture of a moving object can be taken in such a way that it looks completely still, and can also be taken in such a way that it can show the effects of motion. This effect of motion is also called motion blur. Shutter speed plays a major role in both these tasks. Slow shutter speed brings the feeling of motion, on the other hand, fast shutter speed freezes the action. If we want to click a picture of a moving object in which its movement is completely frozen, we should use fast shutter speed. And if we want to take a picture of a moving object with effect of motion, we have to use slow shutter speed. Following pictures display the relation of shutter speed and motion effects.
By Poonam Gaur
Figure 17, Shutter Speed = 1/50sec.
By Poonam Gaur
104 Figure 18, Shutter Speed = 1/200sec.

Techniques
By Poonam Gaur
Figure 19, Shutter Speed = 1/1000sec. Here we can see that the shutter speed is the slowest in figure-17 so the motion effect is the smoothest. As we continue to increase the shutter speed, the action is freezing in next two pictures.
7.5.3 Creative Use of Shutter Speed
Creative use of shutter speed in photography can lead to many beautiful and unique photographs. Here, it is necessary to understand that when we slow down or speed up the shutter speed significantly, we also have to change the settings of aperture and ISO to keep the exposure correct. Now we shall discuss some creative experiments of shutter speed. i. Freezing the action: Many a times such pictures of moving objects are quite attractive in which their action is frozen at any given moment. Since our eyes do not normally see these types of frozen actions, they look attractive. We use faster shutter speed to freeze the action. This technique is very popular in sports photography where we try to freeze the actions of players, but it is also used creatively for other purposes. Figure no. 20 and 21 are the examples of freezing action by using faster shutter speed.

& Videography
Photo by Amit Kumar
Figure 20, shutter speed =1/1000s In this picture, a red ball falls into a jar filled with water and because of that the water bounces upwards. Here, the water surge is captured by using fast shutter speed (1/1000s) which looks attractive.
Photo by Poonam Gaur
Figure 21, shutter speed =1/640s In the picture above, the movement of the sketch pens was frozen with the help of high shutter speed (1/640 Sec). ii. Ghost Effect: Ghost effect is a creative use of slow shutter speed. This effect can be created by the slow shutter speed and the motion blur caused by it. The following picture is an example of ghost effect.

Techniques
Photo by Amit Kumar
Figure 22 : Ghost effect, Shutter Speed = 4 Sec. In this picture, shutter speed was 4 second. It means, the shutter was open for 4 seconds. A shadowy character (girl) appears behind the main subject of the picture and creates ghost effect. When the picture was taken, the camera shutter was open for 4 seconds that resulted four second long exposure. The girl seen behind was sitting hidden behind the woman. In the same 4 seconds, the girl, acting as a ghost, got up from behind the woman and came into the frame and sat down again. In slow shutter speed, the girl was in motion, which caused motion blur and created ghost like effect. The rest of the settings (ISO and aperture) and acting were done according to the mood of the picture. It is necessary to keep the camera completely steady while taking a picture with a slow shutter speed, so a tripod should be used. iii. Light Painting or Drawing: Light painting is a photographic technique which is also called light drawing. Slow shutter speed is used in this technique due to which the exposure time becomes longer. We make a design in front of the camera with the help of a light source such as a mobile torch. The shutter speed is kept so slow that the shutter will remain open until the process of making that design ends. Many beautiful photographs can be clicked through this process. Since the shutter speed is very slow in light painting and the exposure time is very long, it is necessary to keep the camera completely stable. Therefore, tripod should be used in this process. Aperture and ISO settings also have to be kept appropriate to keep the exposure correct. Generally this process is done in very low light. Figure number 23 and 24 are examples of light painting or drawing.

& Videography
By Poonam Gaur
Figure 23: Light painting/drawing, Shutter Speed = 6 Sec.
By Poonam Gaur
Figure 24: Light painting/drawing, Shutter Speed = 8 Sec. Both the pictures were taken with slow shutter speed of 6 second and 8 second respectively. Tripod was also used. These are just basic examples. You can create many beautiful designs by using this technique. Activity 2 Click two photographs. In the first, try to freeze any action, and in the second, try to capture the light painting. Compare their shutter speeds and write your observations. Check your progress: 4 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is shutter speed?

2. How will you freeze any action in photography? Photography
Techniques

3. What is light painting? Explain the role of shutter speed in it.

4. Which of the following sentences is true ?
a. If shutter speed is increased, exposure increases. b. If shutter speed is increased, exposure time decreases. c. Slow shutter speed should be used to freeze the action. d. Faster shutter speed helps to create motion blur.
7.6 LET US SUM UP
We know that effective photography requires both content and craft. No one can become a good photographer without good content, but craft also has its own importance. It helps us to present our content in better way. This combination of content and craft plays crucial role in every medium. If we talk about writing, then here too, both content and craft are necessary. A good writer can be the one who has quality content and also excellent writing skills (craft) through which s/he can present his/her content in an effective way. Lack of either one will prevent you from becoming a good writer. The same formula is also applicable in photography. In this unit, we have discussed a part of the photographic craft. Aperture, shutter speed and ISO are all important tools of photography. Here, we have discussed the uses of these three tools. We have tried to understand how these tools affect exposure, depth of field and motion effects. With the help of correct use of different photographic tools you can present your content more effectively.
7.7 FURTHER READINGS
Kelby, S. (2012). The digital photography book. Peachpit Press. Langford, M., Fox, A., & Smith, R. S. (2013). Langfords basic photography: the guide for serious photographers. Amsterdam: Focal Press/Elsevier. Peterson, B. (2016). Understanding exposure: how to shoot great photographs with any camera. AmPhoto books.

& Videography 7.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check your progress: 1
1. In simple words, the exposure is the amount of light that reaches the
image sensor through the camera lens while taking the picture. The longer the image sensor of the camera is open for light to come in, the greater the amount of light will reach inside.
2. The three elements of Exposure Triangle are following :
i. ISO ii. Aperture iii. Shutter speed
3. d. ISO - 800
4. c. If ISO is increased, exposure decreases.
Check your progress: 2
1. Depth of field is the depth of an area of a photograph which is in focus.
It means, the distance between the nearest and farthest points of the area of the photograph which is in focus.
2. The following three factors mainly affect the depth of field:
i. Distance between subject and lens ii. Focal Length of the lens iii. Aperture
3. If the focal length increases, the depth of field will decrease and if the
focal length of the lens decreases, the depth of field will increase. Check your progress: 3
1. Aperture is a hole or opening of the lens through which light enters the
camera. You can change its size. It can be increased or decreased.
2. If the f-number is increasing, it means that the size of the aperture is
decreasing. For example: If you compare f /22 and f/8, the aperture size of f/22 will be lesser than that of f/8.3. If size of aperture increases, the amount of light inside the camera will
also increase and as a result exposure will increase too. On the other hand, if size of aperture decreases, exposure will also decrease.
4. a. f / 1.4

Check your progress: 4 Photography Techniques
1. The speed with which the shutter opens and closes is known as the shutter
speed. So if the shutter speed is high, the shutter will remain open for a shorter time and the exposure time will be less. On the other hand, if the shutter speed is slow, the shutter will remain open for longer time and the exposure time will also be longer. Shutter speed is measured in second and fraction of a second.
2. An action can be frozen with the help of faster shutter speed.
3. Light painting is a photographic technique which is also called light
drawing. Slow shutter speed is used in this technique due to which the exposure time becomes longer. We make a design in front of the camera with the help of a light source such as a mobile torch. The shutter speed is kept so slow that the shutter will remain open until the process of making that design ends.
4. b. If shutter speed is increased, exposure time decreases.

UNIT 8: PHOTO EDITING
& Videography Structure
8.0 Introduction
8.1 Learning Outcomes
8.2 What is Photo Editing?
8.3 History of Photo Editing
8.4 Digital Workflow
8.5 Basic Image Editing
8.5.1 Types of Graphics
8.5.2 Photo Editing Software
8.5.3 Editing Tools
8.5.4 Digital Image File Formats
8.6 Digital Art
8.7 Ethical Issues
8.8 Let Us Sum Up
8.9 Key Words
8.10 Further Readings
8.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.0 INTRODUCTION
In this unit you will learn about the what and how of Photo Editing. You will be introduced to basic image editing techniques employed during the era of film photography and will be taken through its evolution over the years, till today, the era of digital photography. You will also read about various features of a photo editing software and their uses in photo editing. You will also be apprised of the process that is followed in order to edit digital photographs. Lastly, we shall discuss the impact and the socio-psychological repercussions arising due to photograph manipulation around the world in the social media along with other ethical issues.
8.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this unit, you will be able to: * discuss the evolution of photo editing; * describe the use of various features of a photo editing software; and * ascertain the use and impact of photo editing in digital era.

Photo Editing
8.2 WHAT IS PHOTO EDITING?
You may recall seeing images in newspapers with text on them. These could be advertisements or simple posters or banners. It is understood that the text has been added to the photograph digitally. This is a basic example of photo editing. Simply put, when an image is changed, altered or even tweaked, it is defined as photo editing. One may attribute photo editing to the digital era, while the truth is that the film medium was also not untouched by ways of photo editing. From changing the composition of chemical washes to softening the photograph with use of filters, photo editing has been used to make the photograph more suitable for whatever purpose it was clicked.
8.3 HISTORY OF PHOTO EDITING
You may recall seeing old family portraits of your grandparents. They looked different from what your parents said about them. The eyebrows looked darker, skin more porcelain like, and moustaches more waxed. Ever wondered why? Earlier, before the advent of computers, people used to edit the photographs by hand. While some methods employed the exposure techniques like burning and dodging, some photographs were pasted by exposing two negatives together, or by double exposure. Paint, ink pens and air brushes were used on some to paint or darken the hair, brows and eyes and clear the skin. The airbrushing technique led to the software which is used today to be named so as well. Paint was used to highlight or darken few areas in the photograph. Few filters were used in front of the enlargers in order to expose the negative differently. Traditional prints could be altered while exposing, or by scratching the negative manually. These were also called darkroom manipulations. Some also included bleaching portions of the photograph to colouring certain parts of the photograph by hand to resemble a painting. Earliest examples include a composited photograph of Abraham Lincoln, using his head from one portrait, and body of another famous person from another portrait. Image Source: Unknown author, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commonshttps://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/ File:Manipulated_portrait_of_Abraham_Lincoln_(1860%27s).jpg Figure 1: Compositing Lincoln's face over a photograph 113

Digital Photography A lot of world leaders used photography as propaganda, for e.g. Russian leader & Videography Stalin frequently edited his political contemporaries in and out of the photographs to suit the party inclinations. John Heartfield manipulated photographs by using a technique called photomontage. His manipulated photos worked to critically analyse the Nazi propaganda with the help of media platforms. Photo editing as we know today was made possible by Adobe Photoshop. Photoshop was launched in 1987. Since then, it has become so popular that the word 'photoshop' has started meaning photo editing in general. This software is used till date by the professional photo editors as well. The first open source image editing software General Image Manipulation Program or GIMP was launched in 1995, making image editing accessible to everyone. Today various software such as Darktable, Digikam and Photivo are available as open source. These software enable editing in various formats and also help in organizing and sharing the photographs over social media as well. In 2011, the photo editing app Fotolr Photo editor was released on the android app store, making photo editing possible even for the masses. Today all smartphone cameras allow for Automatic Image Enhancement, which removes the need for basic editing. It clears and brightens the skin and darkens eyes and hair along with adding few more filters. Check Your Progress : 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What were the tools used to edit photographs in the film era?
2. Write a short note on Photoshop.
8.4 DIGITAL WORKFLOW
Digital photography has made photo editing much simpler and accessible to all today. Every photographer today has to now follow a digital workflow in order to edit, display and archive the photographs. One may personalize this workflow according to his/her own need. Here we shall discuss the workflow step by step.
1. Capturing the photograph - you would have learnt about this step in
the previous chapters. Scanning hard copies of old photographs also digitizes them and helps in taking them through further steps.

2. Transferring or Dumping the photographs - Digital technology allows Photo Editing
for formatting and using the same chip again and again for photography. This makes losing the captured photographs very easy. Thus you must transfer the photographs after each shoot onto a hard disk, in a desktop or laptop. One may also create separate folders and name the photographs accordingly. The entire series may be named sequentially after that, like Cityscape1.jpg, Cityscape2.jpg, etc. This makes indexing and finding photographs later easier.
3. Editing the photographs - we shall discuss this in detail in next section.
4. Displaying photographs - Nowadays you can share photos through a
pen drive, CDs and other memory cards. You may also share it through mail or upload through social media platforms such as Facebook and Instagram. You may also upload them on websites such as Flickr and create an online gallery for oneself. Today you can also change the privacy settings and control who can watch these photos and who cannot. Photos can also be used in other media formats, like using them in desktop publishing to be printed in some magazine, or incorporated in a film or a video, or make a montage to be played on any screen.
5. Archiving photographs - While social media archives these photographs
automatically, one may create another backup in a hard disk for future storage. While photos shot on film used to yellow over time, digital photographs stay the same over years. Digital photography was initially shunned by film photographers but over the course of time, it has gained acceptance. Similarly, photo editing was also looked down upon by the eminent names of the field, but today not only retouching is justified, but digital art is also rising as a new field of expression and creativity.
8.5 BASIC IMAGE EDITING
Here, in this section, we shall discuss basic image editing including types of graphics, photo editing software, editing tools, their uses and various file formats of digital images.
8.5.1 Types of Graphics
Firstly let us discuss what are graphics. Graphics are images created or converted digitally. There are primarily two types of graphics: Vector and Raster Graphics. Vector graphics : These are mathematical representations of the lines and curves present in an image. These types of graphics are used to create logos and other graphics that need to be independent of resolution. As a result, they do not pixelate when enlarged. These type of images can be enlarged to any proportion or size without getting pixelated or losing definition. Adobe Illustrator is used for creating graphics of this type. Raster Graphics: these are pixel based images which have a predefined resolution. They are altered pixel-by-pixel in image editing software. They

Digital Photography need to be rendered finally before printing or exporting in any other formats. & Videography They can pixelate when enlarged. Photographs are raster graphics.
8.5.2 Photo Editing Software
A photo editing software is a tool which can be used to manipulate, edit and enhance images. With an interface to import photographs of various formats, the software has an array of tools one may use to achieve the desired result and to finally export the photograph in suitable format. Image editing software can be bought and downloaded from the web. Open source software are available free of cost, while software like Lightroom or Photoshop cost money like other software. While all software function to edit the image, their interface and window layout is different from each other. More complex the software, greater the number of tools and functions available in it. Figure 2: User interface of GIMP These software can be classified on the basis of the skill, expertise and the controls provided. Most basic are the entry level software which are either free of cost or are available for limited time period. Professional software like the Adobe Photoshop and Lightroom offer a number of controls and are used professionally. Few apps that are popular are Snapseed, Afterlight, VSCO, etc. Today, even the word processing software have some photo-editing tools available when using the function to insert images.
8.5.3 Editing Tools
While there are a wide variety of software, there are a few tools that remain common to all of them, however simple or complex the software is. Here are few basic tools : Move Tool, Rectangle Select Tool, Ellipse Select Tool, Free Select Tool, Scissors Select Tool, Fuzzy Select Tool, Crop Tool, Bucket Fill Tool, Paintbrush Tool, Pencil Tool, Airbrush Tool, Ink Tool, Eraser Tool, Clone Tool, Healing Tool, Smudge Tool, Blur Tool, Text Tool, Colour Picker Tool, Flip Tool, Scale Tool, etc.

Photo Editing
Figure 3: GIMP Toolbar At the first glance, the toolbar seems complicated with a variety of tools, but on a closer look, many of these tools are inspired by the chemical lab tools photographers are usually familiar with. Before starting to edit, one should check the monitor or display settings of one's device as well, or else there will be discrepancies between what is seen on the screen and what is printed out or shared and viewed on other screen. Few controls that are most commonly altered are:
1. Brightness: Most basic image adjustment, this tool helps in increasing
the overall brightness of the image. While the underexposed photos lose definition in the dark areas of the photograph and the overexposed photos do not register anything in the lighter areas, this control does not solve that problem, but enhances the average brightness of the photo. Burn/dodge tool helps in doing the same thing, but to select areas of the photograph.
2. Contrast adjustment: Contrast basically means the difference between
the two extremes of the colour spectrum. An image with a lot of sharp white and black would be called a high contrast image and other with a lot of shades of gradient grey would be called a low contrast image. Image editing software can increase the intensity of all colours of the image making it strikes the eye more and creates a high contrast while low contrast image would have lesser difference in the values of the colours making them soothing for the eyes.
3. Sharpness: while this control is commonly confused with the focus
control in the camera, it merely defines the edges of the elements in the photograph. Too much sharpness hurts the eye.
4. Undo: This is the tool one uses the most while learning the ropes or
experimenting. The beauty of digital is that it allows you to reverse a number of steps and redo them again to check the effect, without spoiling the original photo.
5. Resizing: Increasing or decreasing size of an image to suit the
requirement. Increasing the size after a limit pixelates the image, that

Digital Photography is makes it look rugged. Resizing, if not done appropriately, makes the & Videography subject look disproportionate. Resizing is done in order to make the image suitable for various purposes.
6. Cropping: Cropping means cutting out or reframing an image. By
dragging the borders, cropping tool helps in eliminating elements that are not required and recomposing the image. These two tools are available even in the word processing documents, when dealing with images.
7. Rotation: Image rotation helps in rotating the image by angle. It can be
used to make a horizontal frame vertical or correcting a photograph in which the lines like the horizon or buildings seem tilted.
8. Noise Reduction: When pixels can be seen distinctly in an image
making it appear rugged, the picture is said to be noisy. Noise reduction makes the image smoother by reducing the noise.
9. White Balancing: In photography, you may have learnt about white
balance and colour temperature. Getting the white balance right for an image is necessary in order to capture all the colours truthfully, as white light is made up of all the colours. At times it is not possible, or mistakenly forgotten during the time of shooting. Post processing of an image helps in getting the colours right in the image by adjusting the colour temperature of light.
10. Colour Adjustment: This function works by selecting a particular
colour or hue in the image and adjusting its degree or even replacing it entirely. Apart from these, few more tools are offered in software. Selection tools basically help in selecting a part of the image which needs to be worked upon. Rectangle selection helps in selecting an area within the rectangular frame, while free selection helps in choosing more fluid shapes. Move tool helps in shifting the selected area to the desired place while alignment tool makes sure that various selected elements are aligned with the required edge of the frame. Flip tool helps in changing the orientation of the photograph. Scale tool helps in increasing or decreasing the size of the selected portion while perspective tool helps in creating depth in the image. Colour selection tool helps in selecting the areas with common colour while bucket tool helps in filling colour in the selected area. Text tool helps in adding text onto an image. One can also change the size and the font style of the text as well. Apart from these, some advanced techniques include:
1. Modifying chosen areas: one can choose a part of the image and modify
only that. One could also copy one particular element from the frame and move it across, copy it and create a duplicate or just cut it out of the frame entirely.
2. Eliminating the background: The subject is selected and extracted
from the image to be pasted on another background. Think about product photography on most commercial websites which has subjects on plain white background. Or better, think about your photo in your living room, cut out and pasted on the swiss alps! Visual Effects in films are nothing but a more elaborate form of photo editing.

3. Portrait corrections: It is also known as airbrushing. It is used to correct Photo Editing
the complexion, body dimensions, hair etc of the models. Widely used in the fashion industry.
4. Gaussian blur: helps in creating a depth of field in the photograph.
While one can tell whether this was achieved optically in the camera or digitally in the software, this is an easy replacement to focus attention on the select area in the photograph. It can also help in creating the blur that occurs in photography due to motion.
5. Lighting: This tool helps in adding some amount of light in post-
production, in order to hide or highlight certain aspects of the subject. You can also correct the colour cast which may have happened due to some light source during the time of the shoot.
6. Photo masking and layers: It is the process of hiding and revealing the
image layer by layer. It makes animation possible.
7. Special Effects: One may add anything to a photograph, ranging from
text to fog to even an alien space ship!
8. Photo Stitching: When two images are combined together to appear
like they were clicked like that.
9. Correcting lens aberrations: At times photography lens can lead to
unwanted distortions in the image. For e.g. wide angle lenses make the image converge at the corners of the frame. Some software allow correcting these aberrations in post-production.
10. Dust and Scratches filter: This filter is used to correct the fading that
may have happened over the course of time when old photographs are digitized to work upon.
11. Clone stamp tool: Clone stamp tool allows you to duplicate part of an
image. This helps in covering patches or select areas in the photograph
12. Text: One can also add text onto the photograph to create a poster or a
greeting card. Image Source: Photo by Kaushal Moradiya, https://www.pexels.com/photo/adobe-photoshop-backlight-before- and-after-editing-2762759/ 119 Figure 4: Changing background of a photograph

Digital Photography 8.5.4 Digital Image File Formats
& Videography When you are done with editing the photograph to achieve the required result, you need to save it in the required formats. Choosing to save the file with the 'Save As' option leads you to various options of formats you can choose from to save the image. There are broadly two types of image file formats, lossy and lossless. Lossy formats compress the original image. It may seem like a perfect copy, but when you enlarge it, it becomes pixelated and loses details. Lossless formats save the file while compressing, but not losing the image detail. Here are few popular formats used in digital photo editing: * .psd is the format of the files saved in Photoshop. * .jpeg stands for Joint Photographic Experts Group. It is a lossy format and is one of the most widely used format across the world. Most of the cameras and phones save images in this format. * .tiff stands for Tagged Image File Format. It is also a popular image file format. * .png stands for Portable Network Graphics. It is an open source file format. It is apt for online viewing applications like Web Browsers
* EPS(Encapsulated PostScript) and PDF(Portable Document Format)
are used when photographs are to be printed set in some sort of printing format. * .raw file is exactly how it is named, raw, meaning it has not been worked upon at all. They need to be processed in order to be printed or shared through an editor. RAW files are large in size. * .dng is short for Digital Negative Image File. It saves data in uncompressed format, thus very large in size. Today smartphones are eliminating the need for following the entire digital workflow process and learning the tools of these software. With Automatic Image Enhancement, one can automate the process of touching up the photographs in post-production, albeit up to some extent. Automatic Image Enhancement is a feature available in latest smartphones and digital cameras which allow the images to be stored with automatic enhancement. This practically means that one can choose to adjust sharpness or colours or depth of field of an image automatically. You can also fix the red eye automatically. So when you click an image, the said features are adjusted automatically before storing the image. You cannot undo it later on. Most of the smartphones today allow the option of skin whitening and darkening of the brows or hair in the portrait mode. Activity: 1 Download and install any open source photo editing software like GIMP or Photivo on your desktop or laptop. Import a photograph and try working on it exploring various tools and their uses. Check Your Progress : 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.

1. Describe any two basic photo editing tools. Photo Editing
2. Name some advanced photo editing techniques.
8.6 DIGITAL ART
With the increasing popularity of photo editing software, there have emerged a number of art forms that make use of their features. Many graphic artists use these software for creating paintings/drawings, illustrations, cartoon strips etc. Digital art could be completely computer generated, that is starting from scratch just like a painting on Microsoft Paint or it could be using existing images to build upon. Digital art initially met with a lot of resistance from the artist community as they believed that it destroyed the essence of art forms. Andy Warhol was one of the famous artists who combined digital art along with his traditional practices in 1980s. Today Photoshop is effectively used to create 2D and 3D graphics. It also enables the users to create photorealistic environments, to be used in video games, films and virtual reality. Activity: 2 Download and install MyPaint on your desktop or laptop. It is an open source software used to create basic digital art. Try your hand at the software. Import and manipulate an image using its array of tools.
8.7 ETHICAL ISSUES
Photo manipulation has been used since long to create desired narrative in photographs as well. Our brains pick up visual cues present in a photograph and react accordingly. So, it becomes important to understand if the photograph has been manipulated at all, and to achieve what effect. With the rise of magazines, tabloids and the paparazzi culture, photo manipulation became the need of the hour for the press. Photographs of famous celebrities morphed to appear slimmer, fairer and with people whom they had never met in real life started appearing in various print publications. This trend started off the debate about how much creative liberty is bad, and to what extent can the photograph be manipulated to distort the reality. Advertising also requires photographs to be manipulated in order to sell a brand or product image. The whites are made whiter in the detergent ads and the skin is made brighter and blemish free in the ads for cosmetics. Photos one sees in 121

Digital Photography advertising campaigns are heavily touched up. The fashion industry is the worst & Videography under the lens as it thrives on images of beauty. It has been often accused of promoting an unrealistic body image specially in younger people. Manipulation of photographs of a celebrity's skin complexion, hair, body shape and other features is quite common. Many software are used to remove blemishes and wrinkles from the skin, make it appear brighter, erase stray hair and change the hair colour. Some software features can help add/remove costumes, hair extensions, make up and even piercings. In times like this, it is very difficult to tell if it is real, or fake and such images alter the perception of a normal human body for adolescents and teenagers. So, while the fashion industry states that it is catering to the beauty standards already existing in the society, it remains a matter of concern if they are the ones creating them or reinforcing them. Few magazines also came under the radar for being racist when photographs of black celebrities are brightened enough to be labelled as fair skinned. With the advent of social media, the problem has increased manifold. Everyone has access to a smartphone which has a camera app to click photos with Automatic Image Enhancements with a click of a button. These photos can then be uploaded on to the social media with use of any other filters, to reach out to millions at one go. A lot of critical discussion and research is available on how these images affect the body image perception in youth and can lead to eating and mental disorders. So while social media witnessed a rise in number of influencers, many celebrities have refused to get their photos edited at all, due to all these socio psychological issues arising. Few celebrities have uploaded their before and after make-up and editing photos on social media to spread awareness about the body image issues in young women.
8.8 LET US SUM UP
In this chapter, we first discussed the history of photo editing and the role it played in the heyday of film photography. Then after understanding the digital workflow we learnt about basics of image editing, including features of a software and what they are utilized for. After that, we also discussed how image editing software were used not only to modify already clicked photographs, but also in order to create art from scratch as well. Lastly, we went over few ethical questions that photo manipulation raises and how it may affect an individual.
8.9 KEY WORDS
- Canvas: the main workspace within Photoshop where photos, graphics,
and drawings are edited.
- Cloning: copying an aspect of an image to another location in the image
or in a different image.
- Cropping: cutting down the area of an image to repurpose it.
- Filters: effects added to images to manipulate the look.
- GIF (graphics interchange format): It is an image file format used
primarily for saving images on the web originally developed by CompuServe.

- JPEG (joint photographic experts group): It is an image compression Photo Editing
format which uses full range of 24-bit color, but still creates a small file. These images are commonly used in both desktop publishing and website design.
- Layer: It is an area in Photoshop where you can add text, colors, shapes
and other elements.
- Palettes: areas within the workspace of Photoshop which serve functions
such as the paths, swatches and layers palettes. Palettes are generally along the right of the screen.
- PNG (portable network graphic): an alternative image format to GIF.
PNG files are used for web based graphics.
- Photoshop Document (.psd): file format that contains all of the layers,
paths, text and effects added to an image enabling the user to go back into the project and do further editing in Photoshop.
- Raster Graphics: pixel driven pictures that have a set resolution. The
pictures are rendered on the screen one pixel at a time to reproduce the image.
- Vector Graphics: mathematical representations of the lines and curves
in an image. Vector graphics are resolution independent meaning that they can be scaled to any size without losing their sharpness.
8.10 FURTHER READINGS
Kelby, S., & Kloskowski, M. (2013). The Photoshop Elements 12 Book for Digital Photographers. Peachpit Press. Perry, H. (2019). National Geographic Photo Basics: The Ultimate Beginner's Guide to Great Photography. National Geographic. Photoshop, A. (2017). Adobe Photoshop. Red, 2(189), 168. Team, A. C. (2009). Adobe Photoshop CS3 classroom in a book. Bookman Editora.
8.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Earlier, before the advent of computers, people used to edit the
photographs by hand. While some methods employed the exposure techniques like burning and dodging, some photographs were pasted by exposing two negatives together, or by double exposure. Paint, ink pens and air brushes were used on some to paint or darken the hair, brows and eyes and clear the skin. The airbrushing technique led to the software which is used today to be named so as well. Paint was used to highlight or darken few areas in the photograph. Few filters were used in front of the enlargers in order to expose the negative differently.

Digital Photography 2. Photo editing as we know today was made possible by Adobe photoshop. & Videography Photoshop was launched in 1987, since then, it has become so popular that the word 'photoshop' has started meaning photo editing in general. This software is used till date by the professional photo editors as well. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Two basic photo editing tools are:
a) White Balancing: In photography, you may have learnt about white balance and colour temperature. Getting the white balance right for an image is necessary in order to make capture all the colours truthfully, as white light is made up of all the colours. At times it is not possible, or mistakenly forgotten during the time of shooting. Post processing of an images helps in getting the colours right in the image by adjusting the colour temperature of light. b) Contrast adjustment: Contrast basically means the difference between the two extremes of the colour spectrum. An image with a lot of sharp white and black would be called a high contrast image and other with a lot of shades of gradient grey would be called a low contrast image. Image editing software can increase the intensity of all colours of the image making it strike the eye more and create a high contrast while low contrast image would have lesser difference in the values of the colours making them soothing for the eyes.
2. Few advanced photo editing techniques are:
a) Eliminating the background: The subject is selected and extracted from the image to be pasted on another background. Think about product photography on most commercial websites which has subjects on plain white background. Or better, think about your photo in your living room, cut out and pasted on the swiss alps! Visual Effects in films are nothing but a more elaborate form of photo editing. b) Portrait corrections: Also known as airbrushing. It is used to correct the complexion, body dimensions, hair etc of the models. Widely used in the fashion industry. c) Lighting: This tool helps in adding some amount of light in post- production, in order to hide or highlight certain aspects of the subject. d) Photo masking and layers: Process of hiding and revealing the image layer by layer. e) Special Effects: One may add anything to a photograph, ranging from text to fog to even an alien space ship! f) Photo Stitching: When two images are combined together to appear like they were clicked like that.

UNIT 9 TYPES OF PHOTOGRAPHY
Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Landscape Photography
9.2.1 Essential Equipment
9.2.2 Recommended Camera Settings
9.2.3 Shooting in Natural Light
9.2.4 Getting a Good Exposure
9.2.5 Composition Tips
9.3 People And Portrait Photography
9.3.1 Equipment
9.3.2 Lighting
9.3.3 Setting up Camera
9.3.4 Working with People
9.4 Street Photography
9.4.1 Tips to get started
9.4.2 Equipment
9.4.3 Camera Settings
9.4.4 Composition and Light
9.4.5 Legal and Ethical Aspects
9.5 Macro And Wildlife Photography
9.5.1 Macro Photography
9.5.2 Wildlife Photography
9.6 Night Photography
9.6.1 Exposure
9.6.2 Focusing
9.7 Let Us Sum Up
9.8 References and Further Readings
9.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
Photography is the process of capturing light on a light-sensitive recording medium. There are two very important aspects to photography: Technical: It is the science of taking pictures with your camera

Digital Photography Aesthetic: The art of composing to capture stunning images & Videography There are different types of photography. Some of them require specialized techniques. In this unit, we shall discuss the of the different types of photography.
9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this unit, you will be able to: * understand the various aspects of different types of photography; * describe the requirement of suitable equipment and lighting for different types of photography; and * improve your photography skills for different types of photography.
9.2 LANDSCAPE PHOTOGRAPHY
Landscape photography is one of the most common and most widely done photography. There is always more to learn and explore. It is imperative to know how to use light and composition, you will quickly come to understand that making a striking landscape photograph involves a number of essential ingredients.
9.2.1 Essential Equipment
Your Camera : If you are getting serious about taking photographs, you'll want a camera which has a bigger sensor which accepts variety of lenses. DSLRs are the most popular type of camera for landscape photography. They allow you to shoot in RAW format to record maximum data They have a variety of shooting modes including fully manual. Mirrorless cameras are relatively new technology. They also have all the same features as a DSLR. Lenses: It might seem weird or absurd to spend more on lenses than on a camera, most photographers agree that they would always prefer to have a less expensive camera with a quality lens. Lenses come in two different types; prime and zoom. A prime lens has one fixed focal length. A zoom lens has variable focal length. Prime lenses are sharper than zoom lenses. However, zoom lenses are much more versatile and allow you to carry fewer lenses in your bag. To start with you can use the following lenses: * Anything ranging from 10mm-35mm * Regular Zoom 18-55mm * Telephoto 55-210mm Tripod: It's very important to have a tripod for landscape photography. When you have lots of light, it is easy to hold the camera by hand. In low light situations such as sunrise or twilight, you'll need a tripod to experiment and learn with low shutter speeds. Filters: There are some filters used for landscape photography - Polarizing Filter, Neutral Density (ND) filter, and Graduated ND filters can be used if there is a straight horizon. Make sure to get the right filter size for the lenses you are using.

9.2.2 Recommended camera settings Types of Photography
Shooting in RAW: The most commonly used format is JPG files since this is the default setting on most cameras. JPG is a compressed format and it compresses data while shooting. Raw format, is uncompressed with no information loss. Shooting Mode: Most cameras have a mode dial on the top where you can choose your shooting from the following settings; auto; aperture priority; shutter priority; program; or manual. For landscape photography, it is recommended to shoot in aperture priority mode, marked on your camera's mode dial as "A" or "Av". It controls the depth of field in your image - the relative focus in the image that will be in focus. For landscapes, you want everything from the foreground to the background sharp, so it is advisable to use aperture like f/11 or f/18. Metering Mode: Evaluative or Average metering is the most common metering mode for landscape photography. This is your best bet most of the time when the highlights and shadows are spread relatively evenly throughout the scene. Focus Mode: For landscape photography, single shot autofocus is the best option. The other focus modes are good when you have something moving in the frame.
9.2.3 Shooting in Natural Light
Understanding how natural light works is a critical aspect of landscape photography. If the light isn't right for the scene you are shooting, your photographs will not be exposed properly. Sidelight: This happens when light hits your subject on one side casting a shadow on the other. This type of lighting is the most ideal for landscape photography as it creates good contrast emphasizes texture and shape. Backlight: When light is in front of the photographer and is hitting your subject from behind it is called backlight. It gives you high contrast and is difficult for getting correct exposures. This kind of light is used to create silhouettes. Front light: Front light happens when the sun is behind the photographer and is hitting directly on the subject. This is my least favored type of light because it is often intense and unforgiving causing a scene with a lack of texture and depth.
9.2.4 Getting a Good Exposure
Getting a good exposure means using a balanced aperture, shutter speed, and ISO so that you don't have any areas of the frame that are too bright (known as blown out highlights). The problem is that if you have blown out highlights, there is nothing you can do in post processing to fix it. It will forever be a white spot. You may also want to make sure that you don't have any areas that are too dark, unless you are creating a silhouette. Aperture is the variable opening of the lens through which light travels and reaches the sensor and its denoted by f-stop. The smaller the f-stop number,

Digital Photography the larger the opening. If it is confusing just remember it's like a fraction and & Videography 1/4 is bigger than 1/16 so f/5.6 is bigger than f/32. The larger the opening the shallower the depth of field. After setting the aperture, the other two factors in exposure are ISO and shutter speed. ISO is the sensitivity of your sensor to light. A low ISO is used when there is lot of light and high ISO is used in low light conditions or while shooting fast moving subjects. However, increasing the ISO causes noise and it is recommended to use lower ISO. After setting your aperture high and the ISO low, keep the camera is Aperture priority mode and the camera will automatically determine the Shutter speed for the available light.
9.2.5 Composition Tips
When you are a beginner in landscape photography, it can be difficult to know what to include in the frame to make a compelling composition. There are few rules photographers can use to get striking images. Rule of Thirds: The rule of thirds is the most commonly used "rule" in photography and it is like a guideline for photographers. The frame is divided into three equal parts horizontally and vertically and the intersection points become the principal focal points. A pleasing effect can be created by placing the main subject in these focal points. Symmetry: In symmetrical composition the subject exactly in the middle of the frame with equal weight on either side. The two sides of the image are often a mirror image of each other. Leading Lines: Another effective way of composing an image is use leading lines to draw the viewer's eye to the main subject. The lines can be man-made such as roads, fences, or bridges, or they can be natural. Landscape photography examples:
Photograph by Nithil Dennis

Types of Photography
Photograph by Nithil Dennis
Check Your Progress: 1 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Which one is correct as per rule of thirds in relation to the horizon
a. the horizon line should be in the middle of the frame b. the horizon line should be in the upper 1/3 of the frame c. the horizon line should be in the lower third of the frame d. b & c
2. The best time of day to take landscape pictures
a. Mid-day b. Night c. Foggy days d. early morning and late afternoon
3. A tripod helps keep your landscape image in focus
a. True b. False
9.3 PEOPLE & PORTRAIT PHOTOGRAPHY
Whether you are shooting a family or an individual, to master the art of portrait photography there are a few things you need to learn.
9.3.1 Equipment
Fixed Focal length lenses: 50mm lens: Many photographers purchase a variety of 50mm lens along with their kit lens. The price of a 50mm lens is reasonable, and for a lot of photographers, having the ability to shoot at f/1.8 is an art in itself.

Digital Photography If you're shooting with a full-frame camera, the 50mm lens is great for & Videography photographing families and groups. If you're shooting with a 50mm lens on a cropped sensor camera, it's a focal length that's great for portraits and photographing couples. 85mm lens: Most commonly used lens is 85mm, it allows you to fill the entire frame with the subject's face or backup to include their entire body. The ideal focal length for portraitures is considered to be from 85-105mm.
Zoom Lenses
Art Lens: The 18-35mm f/1.8 is designed for cropped sensor cameras, this lens has a range that includes many of the most popular focal length for portraitures. The 70-200mm: This lens is considered to be the best lens for wedding and event photography because of its versatility in capturing people across a variety of focal lengths.
9.3.2 Lighting
Photography is the art of "painting with light". Light is the most important component and it is important to have a good understanding of the different light. There are two different light sources a photographer will encounter. Natural Light : The basic and the most common type of lighting is natural light
- all of the light in your photograph is coming from the sun. The main source
of light is singular and comes from the sun. If you're shooting outside you will obviously be making use of natural light, or it could even mean you're shooting indoors near a large window. Artificial Lighting : The other type of lighting you will encounter is studio lighting (Artificial Lighting). Studio lighting means that you're using a flash, stand light, or other artificial light sources as your primary source of light. Using studio lighting does involve a different set of skills in photography. Learning studio lighting is a great way to achieve a good understanding of different lighting situations.
9.3.3 Setting up Camera
There are two ways to shoot people and portraiture. We can use either Aperture priority or Shutter priority. Aperture Priority : When you use Aperture Priority mode on your camera, you select the camera's aperture, and the camera will select the rest of your settings. You can still select your ISO if you wish. When you select a small aperture number (f/1.8), less of your image will be in focus. When you select a large aperture number (f/8), more of your image will be in focus. To create a portrait with a bokeh, shooting with a very wide aperture (f/1.8) is one way to achieve that effect. Shutter Priority: Aperture Priority mode is used for photographing people who are stationary, Shutter Priority mode is used for photographing people who are moving. In street photography if you want to show the blur of the fast moving people, Shutter Priority is a great way to either stop action or emphasize movement in people photography.

9.3.4 Working with People Types of Photography
There is a whole lot of difference between taking a snapshot of a person and creating a portrait that captures the essence and emotions. So as a photographer it is important to speak and communicate clearly to the people being photographed. Posing : As a photographer first you should make your subjects very comfortable. After you reach the comfort level required you should have pre visualization to make them pose the way you want to. Explaining the concepts and emotions you want to capture will give them an idea. It is also important to choose the right backgrounds and the poses are related to the background. The key in posing with props is to use the prop in the right way. You can also shoot a few trial shots of the model or person you are shooting and then advise them on the specific look, pose you need. Prompting : Prompting to get the right emotion is also a very important part of portrait photography. Children can give a variety of emotions when prompted correctly. A casual talk about favorite movies, or their favorite actress and singers, may be even ask them to explain a funny situation can make the air light to capture the right emotions. Some Portrait Photography Examples:
Photograph by Nithil Dennis

& Videography
Photograph by Nithil Dennis
Check Your Progress: 2 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What kind of light creates a silhouette of a person ?
a. Side b. Front c. Angled d. Back
2. The type of lighting which has flat shadows or no shadows at all
a. Back b. Frontal c. Fluorescent d. Side lighting
3. A portrait that gives importance to the subject and defocusses the
background is a. Candid b. Self Portrait c. Formal portrait d. Candid portrait
4. A portrait that emphasizes the subject's surroundings in an effort to
convey information about the subject is called a. Candid

b. Self portrait Types of Photography c. Environmental d. Formal
5. Any illumination that does not come from the sun or moon is called

a. Artificial lighting b. Fluorescent c. Natural lighting d. Flood light
9.4 STREET PHOTOGRAPHY
Street photography is candid photography people and action on the streets. It shows our surroundings, and how we as photographers relate to them. Photographers filter what they see, to find the moments that are interesting.
9.4.1 Tips to get started
The best tip is to find a good spot on a busy street and wait for the action to take place. If you are walking, you will come across many interesting things, but will only give yourself a brief moment to capture. Find the right location, and then just wait for the right moment to happen. The most important aspect in street photography is to observe keenly. People will be entering your personal space and you will be able to get the best candid shot. Photographing the space near you gives you a lot of freedom as you are familiar with the environment. It is a common misconception that you can only do street photography well in the most interesting cities or famous streets. The best photographer can take good photos in any given location.
9.4.2 Equipment
Street photography can be done with any type of camera. However, different equipment will have different advantages. A zoom lens will give you more flexibility in being candid and not being observed A prime lens will restrict the distance from the camera, but will also be easy to use. Traveling with a light mirrorless, micro four thirds cameras, or even a camera phone, will allow you to take images more easily. They are lighter and fun to shoot. Prime lenses, will allow you to observe the world more intuitively with that focal length.
9.4.3 Camera Settings
Photographer follow different methods to shoot in street. There is no correct way, but a few factors may be considered. Use of bokeh in the images is a very common way for photographers to create nice dramatic images. By choosing to blur the surroundings; you will also remove some of the context and background from the image, which in turn can be detrimental in telling the story. A better suggestion would be to shoot with as much depth of field as possible.
9.4.4 Composition and Light
Composition for street photography is mostly the same as most of other genres in photography, but there are a few things that we can consider. 133

Digital Photography * Compose your street photographs using the general rules of composition & Videography (Rule of thirds, Symmetry, pattern, contrast, color). Observe the scene and arrange all of the elements together. Every element in the frame counts and no matter what it is, and the best way is to have a rhythm in your photography and composition. * In certain situations, you will prefer to use shallow depth of field and get the distracting elements in the frame out of focus. Photographers should try to look beyond the main focus, and see if you can combine it with other elements to create a more complex scene. * It is very important to see how light hits your subject, and where is it located in relationship to that subject? How is it hitting the background? What color is the light, and are there multiple light sources?
9.4.5 Legal and Ethical Aspects
Different countries have different laws for street photography. In many places you get a lot of freedom, but in some countries it may also be illegal. So, while starting street photography at any place we must learn about the related rules and regulations applicable to that particular place. There are also different rules for public and private properties. It is always smart to research the area you're traveling to, so you can find out what street photography practice is like there. In some places, it is much easier to do this type of photography, while in others people may be much more confrontational. Ethics in street photography : Ethics is an important aspect of street photography. Sometimes the subject you have captured may not like to be captured and some might love to be captured. Most street photographers face a moral dilemma, as most of the time the photographer's intentions are to capture culture and lifestyles. The most interesting images are the ones usually with art, culture and people. These are the photographs that so many find fascinating, because there is a lot of cultural value to them. If you have taken someone's picture and that person spotted you, it is important that you show the picture you have taken of them and speak to them and explain them the purpose of your photograph. You can always say that you are photographer who is doing a project capturing the culture and people. If they ask further, to make them comfortable you can agree to delete the images you have taken and at the same time use a bit of flattery so that they volunteer to give permission. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Which cameras is most suited for street photography?
a. Large format b. Medium format c. Mirrorless

2. Which of the statements describes street photography? Types of Photography
a. Moments of everyday street life caught on camera b. Carefully constructed portrait work c. Documenting rural landscapes
3. Choice of aperture is very important in street photography because
a. To control depth of field b. Not to risk exposure c. Shooting large format requires aperture controls only
4. Which of the following are not likely to be found in a street photographer's
camera bag? a. Lens cloth b. Spare battery c. Cable release
5. Which is the most important skill for a street photographer ?
a. Planning lighting and composition b. Good writing skills c. A sound knowledge of camera and settings to shoot quickly
9.5 MACRO AND WILDLIFE PHOTOGRAPHY
9.5.1 Macro Photography
Macro photography is close-up photography of small subjects, including things like bugs and flowers. Technically macro photography is about taking pictures of subjects that are smaller than your camera. Equipment : Close-up and macro photography is a specialized form of photography, and it requires special lenses, flashes and tripods. There are few ways photographers can avoid using these complicated and expensive equipment. Lenses : Macro lenses specially designed to do close focusing. If the budget permits and you want to specialize in macro photography then invest in a high-end macro lens, but for those of us with more limited funds here are two alternatives: i. Extension Tubes: They are exactly what they sound like, it is a tube that go between your camera and the lens. Extension tubes technically increase the distance between the lens and your sensor When you use these extension tubes in combination with a good quality lens, some amazing images are possible. ii. Lens Reversal: This is an old technique similar to inverting a binocular. Take an old, manual lens standard or wide-angle and then buy a cheap adapter that allows you to attach the front of the lens to your camera, and you get an instant macro lens at your disposal.

Digital Photography Lights: Natural light is the best lighting for macro lenses. A place & Videography which has a bright, diffused light, is very ideal. Once you have mastered photographing macro with natural light you can advance to studio lights To learn photographing macro with artificial lights it's important to start off by attaching your flash near, or directly onto your lens, so the light falls just a few inches in front of the glass. Shadows are emphasized up close, so you want to minimize the distance between the flash and your lens.
9.5.2 Wildlife Photography
Wildlife photography is one of the most exciting genres and many amateurs aspire to be wildlife photographers. To be practical it is very difficult to become a wildlife photographer overnight. It requires a lot of technical expertise and photographic gear. It is a genre which requires a lot of patience. It is important to be sensitive, ethical and careful while shooting wildlife. The following are a few tips for a beginner in wildlife photography Equipment: Most wildlife images constitute animal portraits, but a beginner can start with wide shots which includes the environment or the habitat of the animal. The most frequently used lenses for wildlife photography are 500mm . This lens can be combined with a 1.5 tele converter. Many photographers also use the following lenses - 100-400mm zoom, and the 70-200mm f/2.8. Amateur wildlife photographers can rent the lenses and use them before they buy them. Renting is a great and reasonably priced option to try out a variety of lenses. The ideal wildlife kit will look something like this
* DSLR
* 500mm * 100-400mm lens * 70-200mm lens * 1.4x tele converter * A sturdy tripod Techniques : There is a saying in photography: "If your image isn't good enough, you aren't close enough." But in the case of wildlife photography this is tricky. Getting close requires patience. If you approach an animal on foot, the subject will be threatened and move away. So easy way to get close to wildlife is to be in a place where animals are accustomed to people. In most wildlife parks and national parks, the animals are used to seeing people or vehicles and will allow you to get much closer. Wildlife trails can be best places for bird photography. Use a blind: Many wildlife watch towers are equipped with photography blinds which hide you from view of the wildlife. These places are good locations to spot wildlife. You can build your own DIY blind to shoot the birds in your backyard. Camouflage: You can cut a camo sheet to accommodate the lens and sit on the ground. This portable blind serves well, but you need a lot patience to stay in one place for a long time.

Patience: Patience is the key in wildlife photography. Most of the above Types of Photography techniques also require patience, the photographer has to wait, for long hours to capture the right moment. The photographer should find a right place (Ex: near waterholes and nesting areas) and wait to get amazing shots. The best wildlife photographs were done this way. Exposure: It is very important to strive for the proper exposure while you are shooting. Capturing the action, the expression, posture, and the setting are the most important parts of wildlife photography. Make sure you do the right exposure by letting the camera in a setting suitable for the situation and wait for the action to happen. At times you might end up with underexposed or overexposed images which later can be corrected in post processing. The ideal setting for wildlife photography will look like this : Shoot in shutter priority mode, keep the ISO 800, and put the camera on automatic for the remaining settings. This can be used as a standard starting point. Shutter Speed: A photographer will encounter moving subjects most of the time in wildlife. It is very important to decide the action (Blur or Freeze) before you pre-determine the shot.. You can always shoot the moving action in freeze or blur and shift to either mode in seconds in shutter priority mode. Composition: Getting low is a nice trick used by wildlife photographers. Try and analyze the pictures shot by expert wildlife photographers and understand their view points. Most of the time the pictures would be shot from a low angle. This low angle gives you wonderful perspective of the animal's life and habitat mostly true with birds and smaller animals and insects. Portraits: The secret of a good wildlife portrait is getting closer to the subject, and having a setting where the animal can be cleanly separated from its background. Preferably use a large aperture (f4) which will blur the background and the same time retain a certain focus on the subject. Action: In wildlife photography it is also important to record behavior, action, and motion in images. These photographs tell a bigger story, and they are more compelling. Animals spend a lot of time lazing around, especially after food. Birds perch for extended periods, bears sleep or graze, and big cats climb trees and lounge. Most of the time the action won't be a part of wildlife. So it is very important to wait and also research a lot on their behavior to catch them in action. Wide Angles: When you have a subject which is patient as well and is cooperative then you can try a few more techniques in wildlife. Using a wide angle lens, we can capture the habitat and create stunning pictures of animals in their own habitat. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What photographing position is less likely to surprise your wildlife
subject? a. Low to ground b. Standing on the ground

Digital Photography c. High in the tress & Videography
2. The best location to do bird photography is
a. Deserted Island b. Popular beach c. Tropical forest
3. What is the best lens for habitat photography?
a. Telephoto lens b. Super telephoto c. Wide angle
4. What camera setting is to be on priority if you are shooting fast moving
animals ? a. Shutter speed b. Aperture c. ISO
5. Which lens has narrow angle of view ?
a. 10mm b. 100mm c. 300mm
9.6 NIGHT PHOTOGRAPHY
If you take a picture of a building or a normal street scene during the day, it can be sort of uninteresting. The same shot taken in night can be dramatically different and interesting. Night photography can look tricky, but with a little bit of guidance you will be able to capture sharp images. Photographing in the dark certainly has a lot of challenges, in some ways, it is actually easier than photography during the day. So let's take a quick look at the essentials of night photography.
9.6.1 Exposure
The darkness changes everything. The most important thing in night photography is a tripod and a sturdy one. Refreshing a little bit of our own memory we understand that exposure is a result of three controls (the exposure triangle) - shutter speed, aperture, and ISO. So in darkness, the camera needs more light to record the scene, and it is done with affecting any of these controls. For night photography, you will have to use shutter speeds that are longer than one second sometimes significantly longer. Keeping the shutter open for a longer period of time, the camera will require a tripod. You can leave the shutter open as long as you want, as long as the camera is steady and does not move at all. Aperture: We all know that the size of the aperture determines the amount of light being let into the camera for a given shutter speed, and it also affects the depth of field. For night photography, if you set your camera to lower apertures, it will require ridiculously long exposures. In addition, the background is usually

black, so you don't need to worry too much about getting a wide depth of field. Types of Photography We should use an open aperture to capture more light. ISO: The third exposure control, ISO, is a measurement of the sensitivity to light of your digital sensor. Higher ISO results in digital noise which can distort your images. This is a common problem faced while shooting night photographs. It is always better to use optimal ISO and not pump it up too high. However, in those cases where you cannot use a tripod or you have a moving subject, you will need to increase the ISO Exposing Night Sky: There are a lot of techniques that can be used to create striking photographs of the night sky. To photograph the stars in the sky use the widest f/stop as your lens allows, and shutter speed of about 20 seconds. Any more time than that and the stars will begin to blur. Increase the ISO as needed for a good exposure. Use a wide-angle lens, and also incorporate the foreground into your images. The image in the foreground may complement the night sky. The foreground can also be lit using a variety of techniques. Some tips for Night Sky Photography: * Look for cool clear moonless nights * Always have your batteries fully charged * Use a sturdy tripod and cable release; set up your composition, lock down the focus, and make a test shot. * Shoot in RAW format * Set the white balance between 2800degK-4000oK. * Make a series of exposures * A good starting exposure for most star shots is to use the widest aperture on your lens, expose for 20 seconds, increasing the ISO as needed for a good exposure. * Turn ON the camera's Long Exposure Noise Reduction feature.
9.6.2 Focusing
Another tricky situation in night photography is the focusing. Most of the cameras focus by detecting contrast. So the most likely situation at night is that the scene will be too dark for the camera to detect contrast. A few following tips in focusing can help the photographer to achieve sharpness: * Focus on a bright light in the picture (Street Light) * You should try focusing the edge of the light which will give you the necessary contrast. * If you are using an off camera flash or if you are holding a flashlight, you can hold the light to the subject and then focus. * The best way is to use manual focus and rely on your own eye sight. Few examples of Night Photography:

& Videography
Photograph by Nithil Dennis
Photograph by Nithil Dennis
Check Your Progress: 5 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is the best ISO setting for low light conditions?
a. ISO 100 b. ISO 32000 c. ISO 800
2. Aperture is very important priority for night photography.
a. True b. False
3. To obtain traffic trials which of the following shutter speeds is better ?
a. 1/2000th Sec b. 1/400th sec c. 1/5th Sec

Photojournalism
9.7 LET US SUM UP
Photography is fun and can be extremely rewarding to learn as a skill, but it is a skill that can take a long time to develop. After a period of time you will ask a lot of questions about your own composition or the exposure. It will become a habit for you to analyze the light, the shadow, the highlight and the overall feel of the picture you have taken. It is very important to continue shooting and improving the skills. We all learn at different speeds, so all you need is to focus on improving your own images.
9.8 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS
Harnischmacher, C. (2016). The complete guide to macro and close-up photography. Santa Barbara, CA: Rocky Nook. Keimig, L. (2017). Night photography and light painting - finding your way in the dark. Taylor & Francis. McKinnell, A., Gibson, A. S., Flint, J., Lamas, J., Sime, Gilfillan, D., . . . Book. (n.d.). Digital Photography School. Retrieved from https://digital-photography- school.com/ Michals, D. (2017). Portraits. New York: Thames & Hudson. Randall, G. (2020). The art, science, and craft of great landscape photography. San Rafael, CA: Rocky Nook. Tipling, D. (2007). Digital wildlife photography. Buffalo, NY: Firefly Books.
9.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. (d) 2. (d) 3. (a)
Check Your Progress: 2 1 (d) 2 (b) 3 (c) 4 (c) 5 (a) Check Your Progress: 3 1 (c) 2 (a) 3 (a) 4 (c) 5 (c) Check Your Progress: 4 1 (a) 2 (c) 3 (c) 4 (a) 5 (c) Check Your Progress: 5
1. (c) 2 (b) 3 (c)

UNIT 10 PHOTOJOURNALISM
& Videography Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 Photojournalism
10.2.1 History of Photojournalism
10.2.2 Why Study Photojournalism
10.2.3 The Camera as a Tool
10.3 A Picture is Worth a Thousand Words
10.3.1 Visual Research
10.3.2 Composition and aesthetic value
10.3.3 Visual Grammar: Shots and Angles
10.4 News Photography
10.4.1 News Value and Photography
10.4.2 Spot News, Portrait, Sports
10.4.3 Features and Photo Story
10.5 Post Production and Editing
10.6 Photojournalism and Ethics
10.7 Let Us Sum Up
10.8 Keywords
10.9 Further Readings
10.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
10.0 INTRODUCTION
Photojournalism is the process of telling stories using photos as the medium. It uses a camera to capture visual representations of a story. Photojournalism follows a set framework of rules and principles for composition. The stories told using photos are supposedly true and thus should be communicated in a fair and unbiased way. In photojournalism, the news photos often evoke intense emotions among viewers, like shots of disaster survivors or scenes of a terrorist attack. In print media the content is largely text and only certain stories are supported by photos. In photojournalism, photographs are used to tell incidents, events and other important news. It uses the body language and facial expressions of the subjects i.e. the people involved in the incident to tell their story. As the term suggests, photojournalism is the fusion of photography and journalism. It is used extensively in newspapers, news magazines, film magazines and advertising magazines. Every newspaper and magazine takes the services of photojournalists to cater to its audience. News photography is used in print and electronic media to convey 142 the stories and to reach out to maximum audience.

Photojournalism
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading the Unit, you will be able to: * understand the concept of Photojournalism; * understand the visual grammar used in photojournalism; * know the different types of news photography; and * understand composition and its use in photojournalism.
10.2 PHOTOJOURNALISM
Photojournalism is an effective way of telling stories and disseminating information to a diverse group of people. Photojournalism gives visual support to the news story. A good news photo tells a story all on its own and requires little to no writing to back it up. Social media tools like Instagram, Facebook, Snap chat, WhatsApp etc have made it really convenient for people to share photos and videos. These tools are even being used by the news organizations to disseminate news. YouTube provides space to people and organizations so that they can start their own channels where viewers can come and see the videos on a variety of subjects. Photographs paint real pictures of news, events and varied human emotions. In big newspapers and magazines, photographers work with a journalist assigned to a particular news beat. This means that the photographer takes photos related to the new storyand the reporter collects the facts for the story and writes it. The main objective of photojournalism is to tell a story better than the text or writeup that usually accompanies the photos. Therefore, it should capture images that have a specific meaning or relevance to the story being told. For example, a story about a father reunited with his daughter after being apart for 30 years will be more effective if it is accompanied by a photo showing them rushing into each other's arms. Photojournalism covers latest national and international news developments which are of public interest. A good photojournalist will focus on latest news which is being discussed by the common man for example the current cricket tournament series or the announcement of elections etc. which will be of more interest to the reader. A good photojournalist should be objective and honest. He should present the images as they are with no manipulation. In fact a photojournalist knows that real emotions of people are captured when they are relaxed and busy with their daily chores. These candid and perfect moments are captured by the lens and become timeless classics. A good photograph should try to answer maximum number of Ws and H. For example, a photo that shows a family off our begging for food and money tells a clearer story than a single person begging for food. Photojournalists follow certain principles to produce photos that catch the attention of different audiences. Photos taken with the right focus, exposure, angle and colour are understood better by larger audience as compared to photos in which the subject is not in focus and which lack proper camera angle. Photojournalism can be done for -

Digital Photography a) General News Stories, which pertains to any event that is planned ahead & Videography of time. Examples are press conferences, product launch ceremonies, exhibitions and political rallies. b) Spot or Breaking News, refers to any event or incident that has just happened. It is a breaking news story where the photojournalist rushes to the place of the incident and takes shots which convey the essence of the story. A house or building on fire, car accident, plane crash or a bridge collapse are some of the examples. c) Sports Photography is seen as the most difficult type of photojournalism. The camera lens has to follow the movement of the player, ball or the vehicle as the case may be. Special attention has to be given to the aperture and shutter speed settings. Generally experienced photojournalists are given sports assignments like basketball game, a football championship match or an IPL match. e) Portrait Photojournalism: a portrait shows people from the society in their usual environment, like a race car driver beside his car, a doctor inside the operating theatre or the defence minister in her office. The portrait captures the emotional state of the person. Portrait is often given in an exclusive interview or any special report where that person happens to be a central figure or an important functionary. Good photos convey the key points of a story faster than its accompanying text. The photos should focus on the faces of the people and not on their backs. A good photo will show the person doing some action or group of people involved in some activity. Any unusual photograph showing a new phenomenon, emotion or extraordinary act may qualify as a good photograph. The subject has to be in focus and the audience should be able to find the key area to focus on in the frame. For example after a heavy snowfall the focus of one picture can be on the sufferings of the people living in that area and other picture can be on the extent of snowfall i.e. the amount of snowfall. The photographer through right composition and proper visualization has to convey the right message, one that should be able to tell the audience where to look in the photo. Any two pictures will have two different angles for a story. This sort of work needs careful planning and execution. Always take note of the angle of the shots and position of the camera before taking the pictures. Experienced photographers often take multiple shots from different perspectives. This process is quite easy with digital cameras. Digital Single- lens Reflex Camera (DSLR) manufactured by Nikon, Cannon, Sony, Fuji etc. support memory cards as high as 128 GB or so. They can also at the same time see the output and take many shots without worrying about the storage space.
10.2.1 History of Photojournalism
The history of photojournalism can be traced back to the experiments done by Joseph Nicephore. In 1826 Joseph Nicephore slotted a pewter (a alloy of tin, copper with antimony) plate into his camera obscura and exposed that plate to the surroundings. He washed this exposed plate with lavender oil after eight hours and found that an image had formed on the plate. This image was not very clear but the scene was more or less visible. Joseph Nicephore claimed it to

be the first photograph, built without a negative. Carol Szathmari a Romanian Photojournalism painter and photographer was among the first who did photojournalism with the help of his engraving and painting technique. This engraving technique was also used in the American Civil war. The first 35mm Leica camera came in 1925 and this marked the beginning of the Golden Age of Photojournalism. First commercial flash bulbs came in 1927. The early 35 mm camera was small and light. They were more portable and the printing methods used in these cameras were less cumbersome. Prominent photographers in the golden age which spanned from 1930s to 1960s included Walker Evan, Dorothea and Gordon Parks. Homai Vyarawalla is recognized as the first woman photojournalist of India. She was born in Gujarat and it was her husband Manekshaw Vyarawalla who introduced her to the world of photography. Tamabarahalli Subramanya Satyanarayana Iyer, popularly known as T S Satyan is known as the father of Indian Photojournalism. He was born in Mysore in
1923. In 2005 T S Satyan published his memoir "Alive and Kicking" in which
has mentioned his experiences and various assignments he did in his life as a photojournalist. T S Satyan passed away in 2009. It seems the market for visual storytelling is going to stay and rather going to expand further. The media and industry report by Indian Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF) predicts that the market share of television will increase by
7.5 percent in 2023 and for print it will increase by 1.4 percent. Photojournalism
will rather increase with the help of social media in India. Cheaper data plans encourage people to download pictures and consume news in the form of visuals. Many news organizations have started giving news in the form of photo story, slide shows and multimedia presentation .When Life magazine made the announcement in 1972 that it was ceasing its weekly publication, many people said that this was the end of photojournalism. Photojournalism not only survived but it took a new avatar. Photojournalism is just as impactful on a webpage as it is when viewed on the page of a magazine.
10.2.2 Why Study Photojournalism
Photojournalism is the right field for a creative person who has an eye for detail and loves to travel. One who likes meeting people and is prepared to work for long hours in difficult situations can do well in photojournalism. There are lots of job opportunities for a photojournalist. Websites, news portals, news magazines, TV channels and newspapers are looking for dedicated and efficient camera persons. Apart from joining a company, a good photojournalist can become a freelancer. A degree from a reputed college or a university can be an added advantage for the student. Qualified photographers can join: * Print and Advertising Industry -magazines, adverts and photo libraries; * Fashion Industry - creative photography of models and clothing for magazines and catalogues; * Event Company- social functions, family, wedding and celebrations photography; * And Corporate (industrial/commercial) - company promotional material

Digital Photography 10.2.3 The Camera as a Tool
& Videography A camera is a device for recording visual images which may be in the form of pictures or videos. The camera is only a tool. The cameraperson has to master photographic technique. The most important thing is to think of the best way to show the visual regarding the story to the audience. For this, the photojournalist should be able to mentally visualize the shots he wants to show and then plan accordingly. This is achieved by taking the shots from a right perspective. The photojournalist will think about the right angle, content of the frame and the content he wants the audience to focus on. It is always a wise thing to know as much as possible about the subjects to be photographed and think of all possible different perspectives which could be shown to the reader in order to covey the point. These days' professional photographers use Digital Single-Lens Reflex Camera (DSLR). In DSLR instead of hitting the film, the light which enters hits the sensor. DSLR comes with a zoom lens which have a variable focal length in the range of 35 mm-70 mm. A good photograph can be powerful and can be an agent for change. Different journalists and photographers approach news stories differently. Some of them highlight the government's failure in a story, whereas some of them shoot to support a public cause. They capture different aspects of life of a common man to highlight their plight and suffering in order to draw the attention of authorities towards these issues. By publishing the pictures of pending projects and unfinished tasks they remind different agencies and also the public to meet their responsibility. For example by publishing pictures of garbage and piles of waste material the photojournalist reminds the citizens of their duty towards maintaining a clean neighbourhood which is free of dirt and diseases. Good camerawork focuses on the relevant parts of the story i.e. visual parts which are important for storytelling and leaves the rest. The relevant visual parts are photographed in a manner which develops an emotional connect with the audience. Such a photograph with the emotional appeal is liked by the audience and they remember it for long. While doing his camerawork the photojournalist needs to be sensitive towards the feelings of other human beings. Right specifications of focal length, exposure and ISO can bring good results even with an old camera. The specifications depend on whether the photography is outdoor or indoor. The time of the day also affects the quality of the picture. Source of light and the temperature of artificial lights also affect the final picture. A keen study of these parameters will enable a photojournalist to plan his camera work appropriately. Let us discuss a few technical terms used frequently in photojournalism. A good understanding of these terms is necessary to bring the desired results. The exposure or exposure value is the amount of light received by the camera. If more light goes inside the camera the image becomes overexposed and if the amount of light is less it is underexposed. Inappropriate levels of exposure is seen as noise and affects the message. Many newsrooms reject these images as they are not fit for publication. Three values are considered important when looking at the amount of light entering a camera. a) Shutter Speed, b) Aperture and c) Sensitivity. Shutter speed refers to the time the sensor is exposed to the light and is measured in fraction of seconds. A shutter speed of 1/30 exposes 146 the sensor to light for 1/30th of a second. For most cameras successive shutter

speed roughly halves the exposure time (i.e. 1/30s, 1/60s, 1/120s.) Faster shutter Photojournalism speed is required to capture fast motion like a cycling race or 100 meter sprint. Shutter speed of 1/250s freezes the frame. Higher shutter speed also reduces the amount of light entering the camera. Doubling the shutter speed reduces the amount of light entering the camera by half. Shutter speed is the duration, i.e. how long light will take to go through the sensor, while the aperture or the iris is the adjustable opening in a camera lens that determines how much light reaches the sensor in a unit time. Aperture settings are given in f-stops and are written as f/1.2, f/2.8, f/4. F-stop is designated in fractions of focal length. Higher values of aperture represent smaller aperture opening which means higher values of aperture allows less amount of light to enter the camera. Lenses with large aperture which allow more light to enter through are called fast lenses. The third key factor which determines the exposure of a picture is the sensor's sensitivity. The sensitivity of a sensor is denoted by ISO. ISO measures the sensitivity of the image sensor.
100 ISO is accepted as a 'normal' or 'standard' ISO and will give fine shots with
little noise. The photojournalist has to check the ISO settings when covering different assignments with different light conditions. A camera lens is an assembly or combination of optical lenses to make images either on film or any optical storage medium. Different types of lenses have different focal length which helps them to be used in different situations. The focal length of a lens is the distance between the lens of a camera and its image sensor when the subject that the camera is pointing is in focus. The focal length is usually stated in millimetres. Check Your Progress 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the Unit.
1. A good news photograph should answer maximum number of

2. Name four types of news where photojournalism is more relevant

3. Expand the abbreviation - DSLR

4. What marked the start of golden age of photojournalism ?

Digital Photography 5. Who is considered as the father of Indian photojournalism ? & Videography

6. Mention three values that defines the amount of light enters a camera.

10.3 A PICTURE IS WORTH A THOUSAND WORDS
Photography is a medium which conveys thoughts and feelings without saying a word. In fact a photograph can speak louder than words and the message will be clear and with little noise. Photography as a medium of communication is easy to comprehend for the larger audience as the encoding is quite easy. The encoding in news photography has to be easy so that maximum number of people can understand the message and the photograph serves the desired purpose. The beauty lies in the universal appeal of the photograph. People across cultures and boundaries can understand a photograph and relate to its content. Photographs in the form of selfies, cellphone snaps, unplanned photos and any time random shots has flooded the social media and internet with visuals in the present visual culture. Anybody can become a photographer and with the help of a good camera and software can do wonders. This massive production of images in the digital form is affecting photojournalism and the importance it used to carry. Photographs are representations of time and events, light and shadows, and contrasts of vibrant colours. A good photograph speaks to our own emotions and to the thoughts and emotions of others. Photos allow us to express our feelings in a unique way. The photo could be a portrait that shows an important day of a person's life and catches him or her in a certain mood. The background of a portrait could be mountain, desert or a scenic beauty of any kind. A painter or a sculptor also displays a part of the world as seen and interpreted by him. He uses his perception and creates a static reality of time and events. A photograph on the other hand does all this and also captures the same world where we all live. It depicts different point of reality through a much larger canvas. A photograph transfers the viewer to the place and time shown in the photograph.
10.3.1 Visual Research
Visual research examines the everyday visual culture, which includes the visual signs and markers that we encounter in daily life or in different social situations. It focuses on images. Pictures represent data which is analyzed using different research methodologies. Pictures are also a means of data representation. Visual research also studies representation of human bodies in different social conditions which represent reality. Visual communication is often interpreted differently by different people, i.e. the same message may mean different things 148 to different people. For example an image of dog may mean a companion, a

pet, a guard or a help. Each person's perspective comes from his education, Photojournalism background and culture. Different meanings of the dog could be because of different angle and position in the picture. It could also be because of different size, colour and looks of the dog.
10.3.2 Composition and Aesthetic Value
Composition can be defined as the arrangement of objects within the frame of an image. A photo with good composition and proper values of exposure, contrast and ISO looks pleasing. Good composition directs the eyes of the viewer. A picture with good compositions is easy to comprehend. The photojournalist can plan a good composition after seeing the subject matter of the story. Good composition is achieved through contrast of size and colour, contrast of shape, through patterns, rhythm, distribution of subject/s and props in different planes i.e. the foreground, middle ground and the background. This is achieved by using a wide angle lens which provides good depth of field. Contrast of light can also highlight key components in the frame and hide components which are not required for the story. Bright light can direct the attention of viewer and help him to understand the crux of the visual image. A good photograph with right composition will hold together and will not divide the attention of the viewer. Composition can be learned by practice and the rules are just guiding principles. These rules can always be bypassed and are not sacrosanct. The human brain can perform seeing and composition simultaneously. This extremely important skill becomes better with practice. After acquiring these skills a competent photojournalist can easily evaluate his photographs as a whole. Rule of thirds is one of the most popular rules of composition.. Four lines (2 horizontal and 2 vertical) will divide the frame into 9 parts. Thus the four points of intersections are the key points for placement in the frame. According to this rule the key subject, action or prop in the frame should be placed at the intersections of the imaginary lines that divide the frame into thirds. Placing the subject in the centre of a frame is seen as bad composition. This rule is often useful when it is 2 shot i.e. where two people are talking or fighting. Proper placement of subjects at points can create a high angle shot, a low angle shot and an eye level shot also. A skilful, creative person with knowledge of visual aesthetics can utilize the full potential of a camera. Simply pointing and shooting the camera, i.e. using automatic controls is not photojournalism or even photography. It is the art of the person behind the camera that produces award winning pictures. Press photographers are always short of time and rarely have time to plan good composition. In case of breaking news it is quite difficult to plan a shot like this. In case of a portrait, feature or a photo story they have the time and can take photos with high aesthetic values and composition.
10.3.3 Visual Grammar: Shots and Angles
The photograph of a subject whether stationary or moving can be taken from different points of view. These different points of view are captured by a) changing the angle and the position of the camera or b) by changing the position of the subject . 149

Digital Photography The location in both these cases can be the same. Each image will be a different & Videography one and will convey a different story. So for a certain event or a news story a cameraman can take multiple shots and experiment with different values of exposure and focal length. In case of the photography as the camera person changes his position the background changes, lighting changes and so does the composition. The cameraperson can move close to the subject or move his lens close by using zoom lens. Keep in mind that moving the camera close physically is different from moving the zoom lens closer. These two shots will create different perspectives. Often the photojournalist uses a tripod to make the camera stationary especially if the event is of a long duration. A good photojournalist always prefers to take multiple takes from different angles and positions. Either he uses zoom lens or moves physically closer to the subject or the place of action. The art of proper visualization helps the photojournalist in the long run. Visualization means to form a mental image of the frame and all that the photojournalist plans to capture in that frame. Check Your Progress 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the Unit.
1. Explain the qualities of a photograph?

2. Define the term 'composition'?

3. is one of the most popular rules of composition.
Table: 4. If the camera moves, to the subject the distance, and the shot size becomes and
5. Name two factors that decides the appeal of a shot?

10.4 NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY
A news photographer should try to capture the essence of a whole story in a single image. This photographer should take pictures as the event unfolds.

This will add credibility to the story. In certain situations the photographer has Photojournalism to wait for the right moment to capture a photo for a news story. He should have patience, perseverance, the ability to predict events and should be a quick thinker. These qualities will help him in situations where the final outcome of a event is not known. It can be court decision, cricket match or a public rally. A good photojournalist covering spot news should always make a contingency plan also to get the shots for his story. The camera person not only has to protect himself, but also has to take care of the equipment and above all he should take plenty of shots for his newspaper or magazine.
10.4.1 News value and Photography
Photography for newspaper includes photographs on a variety of subjects. News photographs are published with hard news as well as with soft news stories. The photojournalist should have a nose for news and he should highlight 'key' component in his photography. Children, traffic, celebrities, politicians, members of society etc. all these are common subjects for news photography. Large organizations hire experienced photojournalists otherwise in small newspapers one persons does both still and video camerawork. Photojournalists also specialize in their work, some of them are good at sports whereas other prefer spot news or breaking news. Depending on the assignment they need to carry a variety of lenses, flash light, additional battery backup, tripod, filters, memory card etc. in their camera bag. News can happen any time of the day. There can be a fire accident at night or a crime which is committed at night. The weather might be sunny and clear or it might be cloudy and dark. A photojournalist has to chase news and show it through his pictures. Digitalization has not only made the camera better but it has also made the dissemination of videos and photos much faster. An experienced new photographer would arrive early at an event and would stay late to take some interesting and unusual shots. It is always wise to keep some storage free in the camera to capture expected events which qualify to be shot.
10.4.2 Spot News, Portrait, Sports
Spot News: Photojournalism for Spot news refers to photos which are taken for a time-sensitive news event. The news is governed by the basic values of timeliness, proximity, conflict, prominence and human interest. Typical spot news can be on accidents, fires, political meetings, rallies, elections etc. These events attract large crowds also and a photojournalist would do well if he plans this in advance. In some cases the camera person has to follow the subject also so he can rarely use a tripod. The camera work is all hand held. He should try to take still shots as the camera can also shake in a huge crowd. Special attention is to be given to aperture and ISO in case of breaking news at night. Additional lights and battery backup is a must. The photojournalist should remember that there are no re-takes in spot news. Failure of equipment at the time of new coverage can make you lose your job. In case of accident, tragedy or big news always look at human loss first, i.e. grab those pictures and after that take pictures of loss of property etc.
3 A portrait attempts to show the nature and emotional state of a person in his
world. A portrait shows a person in his place of work, in a social setting and may

Digital Photography highlight his status, authority and contribution etc. A portrait may reveal more & Videography about a person's character and show it from new perspective. A good portrait will avoid busy background. Busy background will distract the audience and he/she will not be able to focus on the subject and his environment. Props in a portrait are extremely important as they help in storytelling and help in making the picture complete. Many photojournalists while taking shots for a portrait focus on the face and take close up shots. Photographers also often choose to take portraits against a white or a black background. For group portraits soft light is preferred. Portraits also become interesting when special attention is given to the dress, body language and expressions of the subject. The main challenge for the photojournalist is to make the subject feel comfortable and develop a rapport with him/her. The best method is to start a conversation and gradually the subject starts moving in a comfortable zone. This moment of confidence gives best shots to the photojournalist. In portrait the main light should fall on the side of the face of the subject. It also good to know your subject before planning a portrait. This will help the cameraperson in capturing his personality and attitude in a much better way. A portrait can be a medium shot or a full shot. Sports photography: Sports photography is about timing. It is about being in the right place at the right time. A photojournalist covering sports has to be an athlete first. He should have good knowledge of all sports and the various rules of all major sports. This knowledge will help him in predicting the game and by this he can plan his camera work in a better way. For example in a 20-20 IPL match the photojournalist should know that after 15 overs the batsman will really go after the ball and there will be more boundaries. So the photojournalist can focus more on the batsman and the movement of the cricket ball. Sports photography is difficult because the movement of a ball, person or a vehicle is to be recorded. This is done by ensuring proper shutter speed, aperture and the use of right lens. Telephoto lens (300mm-400mm) is used in case of cricket or soccer. The faster the lens the faster the shutter speed one can use. Higher shutter speeds are required to freeze the action with long lenses. The position and the angle is of important here as it varies from game to game. In boxing, the camera is to be at eye level whereas in basketball high angle shot is preferred.
10.4.3 Features and Photo Story
A photo feature is about capturing everyday activity or shooting a slice of everyday life. Features are timeless and unlike news pictures do not get stale. For example pictures of former President APJ Abdul Kalam talking to school students is a timeless feature. Photo features evoke a reaction from the audience as they convey emotions to the viewers. Candid shots of celebrities, sports persons, politicians can qualify for features. A person with a creative bent of mind can plan and execute good features. He should have keen eye for details and should observe the surroundings to identify subjects for features. Every big hard story may have some side stories, these side stories may offer some good features. Animals, children, artists, actors, elderly people are great subjects for a feature. A photo story is based on a theme. The individual pictures in the photo story are on one subject or on one issue. Different pictures support one central idea. There can be photo story on the life of former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. These pictures can be about his political career, family, education

etc. The style of lighting is generally the same and background can be different Photojournalism in different pictures of a photo story. Photo story on political leaders and their achievements often come in news magazines.
10.5 POST PRODUCTION AND EDITING
Editing: Post production is done for effective communication. Editing is done by selecting, cropping, and enlarging certain photographs for a bigger impact. A photo editor may not be a photojournalist. The photo editor may crop the image, check the white balance, check noise, remove noise, and improve sharpness. Resizing and scaling of the images is also done in editing. It is always good to work with 'raw' images during editing. The image formed through the camera sensor is the 'raw' image. Adjustments like conversion into grayscale, and normal toning and minimal colour adjustments are acceptable as long as they restore the authentic nature of the photograph.
10.6 PHOTOJOURNALISM AND ETHICS
Photojournalism provides important information to its audience. This information has to be correct as it is important for decision making. A photojournalist has to show whether the message in the picture is for the larger interest of the society. The photojournalist should also respect the privacy of a person or a family which is involved in the story. Breach of privacy and selling of pictures of a private event is unethical. In a private party or a function it is always good to seek permission before taking pictures. Manipulation is to be avoided. Re-enacting of events or staging of events is seen as manipulation. Adding or deleting of images, substantial background or pros is also counted as manipulation. One has to be careful when taking pictures of a major tragedy like earthquake or an explosion. Mutilated parts of human body are not to be shot and published. Human body and its parts should not be published unless there is requirement as in case of health story. If the publication is for public good then it may be photographed and published. The content of a photograph must not be altered in Photoshop or by any other means. The faces or identities of the subjects must not be altered by image editing tools like Photoshop. Lot of media organizations say that the removal of "red eye" from photographs is not acceptable. Photo editor should not manipulate images or add in any way that misleads the viewers. Check Your Progress 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the Unit.
1. What do you understand by photojournalism?

2. Discuss the different types of shot used in photojournalism?

& Videography

3. If you are asked to cover a cricket match in your town, what preparations
will you do to get perfect pictures?

4. What are the primary ethical issues that a photojournalist should adhere
to?

10.7 LET US SUM UP
Photography is a creative process of recording pictures by means of capturing light through a camera a on a light-sensitive medium, such as a sensor or film. Light patterns reflected from objects are recorded onto a sensitive medium or storage chip. In newspapers and magazines a photojournalist does with photos what a reporter does with words. A good sense of aesthetics and composition are useful tool for a photojournalist. Besides using the camera he should be computer savvy and be willing to experiment with new technology. Photographers must be well organized, practical, and friendly in nature. Finally they must have excellent communication skills and should work in an ethical framework.
10.8 KEYWORDS
Shutter speed refers to the time the sensor is exposed to the light and is measured in fraction of seconds. F-stop is designated in fractions of focal length. Higher values of aperture represent smaller aperture opening which means higher values of aperture allows less amount of light to enter the camera. Close-up (CU) shot shows a character's face and shoulders. It shows subtle facial expressions clearly. It is used to show the emotions of the suffering of a person say after a tragedy.
10.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Blaney, A., & Shah, C. (2018). The Aesthetics of Contemporary Indian
Photography in an "Incredible India". Photography and Culture, 11(1), 3-18.2. Hoy, F. P. (1986). Photojournalism: the visual approach. Prentice Hall.

3. Kobre, K. (2008). Photojournalism: the professionals' approach. Photojournalism
Rutledge.
4. Lester, P. M. (2015). Photojournalism: An ethical approach. Rutledge.
5. Pinney, C. (2008). The coming of photography in India. British Library.
10.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1
1. A good news photograph should answer maximum number of Ws and H
2. General news stories, spot news, sports news, and Portrait photojournalism
3. Digital Single Lens Reflex Camera
4. Introduction of 35 mm Leica Camera
5. T S Satyan
6. Shutter Speed, Aperture and Sensitivity
Check Your Progress 2
1. Photographs are representations of time and events, light and shadows,
and contrasts of vibrant colours.
2. Composition can be defined as the arrangement of objects within an
image's frame.
3. Rule of thirds
4. If the camera moves closer to the subject the distance decreases and the
shot size becomes bigger and vice versa.
5. Position and Angle
Check Your Progress 3
1. Photojournalism is an effective way of telling stories and disseminating
information to a diverse group of people. Photojournalism gives visual support to the news story.
2. Extreme Close-Up, Close-Up, Medium Shot, Wide Shot, and Extreme
Wide Shot
3. Sports photography is difficult because the movement of a ball, person
or a vehicle is to be recorded. This is done by ensuring proper shutter speed, aperture and the use of right lens. Telephoto lens (300mm- 400mm) is used in case of cricket or soccer. The faster the lens the faster the shutter speed one can use. Higher shutter speeds are required to freeze the action with long lenses.
4. A photojournalist has to show whether the message in the picture is for
the larger interest of the society. The photojournalist should also respect the privacy of a person or a family which is involved in the story.

UNIT 11: LIGHTING TECHNIQUES - II
& Videography Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 Different Lighting Techniques
11.2.1 High-Key Lighting
11.2.2 Low-Key Lighting
11.2.3 Short Lighting
11.2.4 Broad Lighting
11.2.5 Butterfly Lighting
11.2.6 Other Types of Lighting
11.3 Lighting Instruments and Accessories
11.3.1 Different Types of Lights
11.3.2 Lighting Accessories
11.4 Let Us Sum Up
11.5 References and Further Reading
11.6 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
11.0 INTRODUCTION
We have already discussed that lighting plays a crucial role in photography, video production and film making. So we are discussing this topic in detail and have included two units on lighting. This is the second unit. In the previous unit (Unit No. 3), we discussed the importance of lighting, different characteristics of light, fundamentals of lighting and basic lighting techniques, i.e. three-point lighting and four-point lighting. In this unit, we will take this discussion further. Here we shall talk about some useful lighting setups and techniques. Apart from this, this unit also gives information about different types of lights and lighting accessories.
11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this unit, you will be able to: * discuss the different lighting setups and techniques used in photography and video production; * explain about the different types of lights commonly used in photography and video production; and * know about various lighting accessories.
11.2 DIFFERENT LIGHTING TECHNIQUES
In this section, we shall discuss some important lighting techniques in detail.

11.2.1 High-Key Lighting Lighting
Techniques - Ii High-key lighting is a lighting technique where the difference between the brightest area and the darkest area in the image is very low. It has low contrast. It means, there is not much variation in the amount of light in the entire frame. If you see a scene or image that has enough light on everything that comes inside the frame, it is an example of high-key lighting. It displays an upbeat mood. High-key lighting is used in cheerful scenes, television news, TV interviews etc. High-key lighting can be done by using more fill light or soft/diffused light. Figure 1: High-key lighting
12.2.2 Low-Key Lighting
This is just opposite to the high-key lighting. In scenes or pictures where low- key lighting is used, the contrast is greater. That is, there is a considerable difference in the amount of light at the brightest and darkest areas in the frame. Low-key lighting is used to create drama. It is considered to be aesthetically more creative and frequently used in films. It attracts the viewers' attention to a specific area in the frame. Low-key light is also used in portrait photography. Generally, we use only key light in low-key lighting. We should use hard light as the key. Image Source: Malber / CC BY-SA (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/), https://upload.wikimedia.org/ wikipedia/commons/e/e4/Stacy100dpi.jpg Figure 2: Low-key lighting

Digital Photography 11.2.3 Short Lighting : & Videography Short lighting is a technique used in photography, film production, and video production. In this lighting setup we position the key light source to illuminate the side of the subject's face that is farther from the camera. This lighting setup creates dramatic effects by emphasizing the shadows on the subject's face, and can be used to add depth and dimension to a shot.
11.2.4 Broad Lighting
In broad lighting setup, the subject is positioned facing slightly away from the camera. The key light illuminates the side of the face that is closer to the camera. This creates a broad, even illumination across the face, with softer shadows and highlights than would be seen in a more dramatic lighting setup. Since broad lighting makes faces appear wider, we should use it photographing subjects with narrow or angular faces. You must avoid broad lighting on subjects with wide faces, it can enhance the shape of their face. It can also be used to create a more natural or relaxed look, as it produces softer shadows and highlights. If your subject has a feature on one side of their face that you want less emphasis on, simply place the feature on the smaller side of the face and use broad lighting to cover it in shadow.
11.2.5 Butterfly Lighting
Butterfly lighting is a portrait lighting technique commonly used in photography and film. It's named after the butterfly-shaped shadow that appears under the subject's nose, which is a distinctive feature of this lighting setup. In butterfly lighting setup, the key light is positioned directly in front of the subject, above their head, and angled downwards. It illuminates the subject's face from above, creating shadows under the cheekbones and chin. The fill light, which is placed below the subject's face, is aimed upwards towards their chin. The purpose of the fill light is to soften the shadows created by the key light and provide a more even illumination. The combination of the key light and fill light creates a butterfly-shaped shadow under the subject's nose, which is the hallmark of this lighting setup. The result is interesting and dramatic. Butterfly lighting is particularly effective for portrait photography, especially for beauty and fashion shots. It can be adjusted to create different moods and styles by changing the angle and intensity of the lights, and by adding or subtracting additional lights to the setup. Check Your Progress : 1 Note : Use the space given below for your answers. Compare you answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. Highlight the differences between following:
a. High-key lighting and Low-key lighting b. Short lighting and Broad lighting

Lighting Techniques - Ii

12.5.5 Other Types of Lighting
Now, we shall discuss some other popular lighting techniques used in television production and photography. Split Lighting: When we place the key light at the 900 from the camera, it illuminates half of the subject's face. Half of the face is bright and half is in the shadow. Since this type of light splits the face into two almost equal parts (half illuminated and half dark), it is called split lighting. It creates dramatic effects. Figure (3) shows the example of split lighting. Figure 3: Split Lighting Flat Lighting: The lighting which produces very minimum shadow is called flat lighting. In flat lighting, you will find very little contrast. It lacks depth and details. It gives uniform illumination across the frame. If we illuminate the entire frame area with a large light source, the effect of flat lighting is created. The effect of flat lighting can also be created by illuminating a subject from the front. The camera mounted lights result in flat lighting. If we keep the intensity of key and fill lights the same (1:1), it will create flat lighting. Although flat lighting makes the image or shot visually dull but it also has some advantages. With the help of flat lighting, we can hide skin imperfections like blemishes, wrinkles, etc. Silhouette Lighting: The silhouette lighting effect can be created if you turn off the lights illuminating the subject from the front (key and fill light) and keep the background light on. Silhouette lighting produces a dramatic effect. It is also used in television news channels or documentary films to hide a person's identity. Following figure (4) shows an example of silhouette lighting.

& Videography Figure 4: Silhouette Lighting Cameo Lighting: In this lighting technique, we place the subject in front of the dark background. Light is thrown only to the subject from the front and the whole background is completely dark. Cameo lighting can be done with the help of spot lights. The objective of this type of lighting is to bring the entire focus of the audience to the highlighted portion of the composition. Check Your Progress : 2 Note : Use the space given below for your answers. Compare you answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. What is split lighting ?

2. Explain flat lighting.

11.3 LIGHTING INSTRUMENTS AND
ACCESSORIES
Lighting requires different equipment. In this section, we shall discuss different types of lights and lighting accessories.
11.3.1 Different Types of Lights
Different types of lights are used in photography and television programme production. Here, we shall discuss some of them. Spotlight and Floodlight: On the basis of the spread of the light beam, we can classify lights into two categories - spotlight and floodlight. Spotlight creates narrow light beam, generally not more than 450. It is used to highlight a small

area or a particular subject/object. The floodlight, on the other hand, produces Lighting wider light beams and can illuminate larger areas. Techniques - Ii Tungsten Halogen: It is an incandescent lamp that produces light by heating a tungsten filament. Since halogen gas is also used in this light, it is called tungsten halogen. It is very cheap and earlier it was very popular in video production. It is a powerful light that can produce high intensity light. Tungsten halogen gives yellowish light with 3200K colour temperature, so does not match with daylight. Its energy efficiency is quite low and it produces a lot of heat as a by-product. In the context of light, energy efficiency means what percentage of the consumed electricity is converted into light. More energy efficient lamps produce more light by consuming the same amount of electricity. HMI Light: HMI stands for hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide. This light came into the market in the 1960s. It became very popular among filmmakers. It has many advantages. HMIs are nearly four times more energy-efficient than tungsten. It also produces heat but much less than tungsten. It gives high intensity light with 5600K to 6000K colour temperature which matches with daylight. With a strong HMI light, you can create the effect of a sunny day even at night. These lights are also used as fill lights during daytime exterior shoot. But HMIs are very expensive and require enough expertise to handle them. Fluorescent Light: Fluorescent lamps produce soft light. They can emit light with different colour temperatures. They are more energy efficient than incandescent lights, therefore producing very little heat. Since a single fluorescent lamp or tube cannot produce adequate light, you will find fluorescent banks in studios with 2, 4 or 6 tubes. LED Lights: LED stands for Light Emitting Diode. These are the most energy efficient lights that produce the lowest heat. You can keep these lights closer to the subject. Their lifespan is also longer than incandescent and fluorescent lights. LED lights are also robust. They can produce light of different colour temperatures. LED is rapidly gaining popularity in the television and film industry. It is considered the light of the future.
Figure 5: LED Camcorder Light
(A battery operated LED light with diffuser and barn doors. It can be mounted on the camcorder) Sungun: Sungun is quite a popular light in video production. It is very cheap and handy. You can mount it on the camera or put it on light stand by using 161

Digital Photography the adapter. It can also be used by holding it in the hand. When mounted on & Videography cameras, it illuminates the subject from the front and creates flat lighting. Earlier, tungsten halogen lamps were used in sunguns, but now LED sunguns are also very popular. Fresnel Light: Fresnel lights are lights that use Fresnel lenses. These lenses are used to produce light beams of different angles and named after their inventor, Augustin-Jean Fresnel, who invented this lens initially for use in lighthouses. You can make wider and narrower light beams with the same light. Different companies make fresnel lights with different beam ranges but commonly these lights can produce light beams between 14o to 55o. Fresnel lights are available with tungsten lamps as well as LEDs. Figure 6: Fresnel Light
11.3.2 Lighting Accessories
Lighting accessories also play a very significant role in the whole lighting process. Now, we shall discuss about some important lighting accessories. Gels: Gels are transparent sheets that can be placed in front of light sources to modify the colour temperature, colour, quality, or intensity of light. Generally we use four different types of gels in photography or television production - neutral density gels, diffusion gels, colour correction gels and colour effect gels. Neutral density gels are used to reduce light intensity. By using these gels, you can cut the brightness of the light without affecting other light properties. Diffusion gels diffuse the light and make it softer. Colour correction gels are used to modify the colour temperature of the light. There are two main colour correction gels - CTB and CTO. CTB stands for Colour Temperature Blue. It is used to cool the lights. With the help of CTB, you can convert tungsten (3200K) into daylight (5600K). The second is CTO. CTO stands for Colour Temperature Orange. This is the opposite of CTB. It is used to warm up the lights. You can convert daylight (5600K) to tungsten (3200K) using this gel. The last one is the colour effects gel. Colour effects gels modifies the colour of light. You can create colourful backgrounds with the help of these gels. Light Stand: Light stands are used to mount different types of lights. You can adjust the height of the light stand according to your needs. Following figure (7) shows a light stand.

Lighting Techniques - Ii Figure 7: Light Stand Barndoors: Barndoors are fixed in front of the lights. 2-leaf or 4-leaf barndoors are very common. They are used to shape light beams. With the help of barndoors you can also cut the light and experiment with many creative lighting patterns. Following figure (8) shows a 4-leaf barndoor. Figure 8: 4-leaf Barndoor

Digital Photography Scrim: Scrim is a metal mesh like device which mainly reduces the intensity & Videography of light. It does not affect the colour temperature. Scrim comes in different strengths which reduces light to varying amounts. Single scrim reduces the intensity of the light by a quarter, while the double scrim reduces it by half. If you place a double scrim in front of the 650W light, its intensity will be reduced to 325W. In incandescent lights, if you use dimmer to modify the intensity, its colour temperature will be affected. So, it is more appropriate to use scrims. In the figure (9) below, the scrim with a green frame is a single scrim, while the red one is a double scrim. Figure 9: Single and double Scrims Reflectors: The reflectors are used to reflect light. Reflectors are used in both outdoor and indoor shoots in photography or television production. We also often use reflectors as fill light and back light. Suppose we are taking the sun as our key light, then with the help of reflectors we can reflect the sunlight and use it as fill and back. Reflectors are used extensively in lighting. You can see the different reflectors in following figure (10). Image Source: Scott Riggle (CC BY 2.0) https://www.flickr.com/photos/scottriggle/13876212595/in/photolist-n9cdyK-FfnLM-4mh6NR-5fqQS-4WsXpn- jRWbkr-5ri2HL-8jgAdY-qwY7gK-imwYx8-gYsZXS-imwUCK-s1Xed-9KHjYx-pVzXV-fNd1qe-c2MPum-dNGSAy- 7tgYN7-Ffktd-2UnSee-9rr9gD-2UjXk6-ff3Jh8-2Uthbu-2UkYLk-aw7J2H-yAW72-aVudMc-4odVV-c2MP4G- 2V3nNB-5bwTt2-d2K8QL-nUrQJT-pmKig1-k2Y8pc-9CQWe3-9yE1kN-9zNetE-7VMJ7d-2WzeSE-8EnS7e- aknnMq-8UtTe4-59dJfF-fNd1rk-2V3px6-2V7No9-gYt3Wf Figure 10 : Reflectors

Softbox: Softbox is used to soften the light. It diffuses the light, which makes Lighting the hard light relatively soft. It is used extensively in photography and television Techniques - Ii production. Its side and back walls are shiny which reflect the light and there is a diffuser in front which diffuses the light and produces soft light. Softboxes come in different shapes and sizes. Larger softboxes will produce softer light than the smaller ones. Image Source: By Dmitry Makeev - Own work, CC BY-SA 4.0, https:// commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=78089122 Figure 11: Softbox Check Your Progress : 3 Note : Use the space given below for your answers. Compare you answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. List any five important lighting accessories.

2. CTO stands for
a. Colour to Orange b. Colour Temperature Opposite c. Colour Temperature Optimum d. Colour Temperature Orange
3. CTO and CTB gels perform opposite functions.
a. True b. False

Digital Photography 4. Fresnel light uses a lens. & Videography a. True b. False
5. What is cameo lighting?

11.4 LET US SUM UP
In this unit we discussed various lighting techniques like high-key lighting, low-key lighting, short lighting, board lighting, butterfly lighting, flat lighting, silhouette lighting, cameo lighting, and split lighting. Various types of lights and lighting accessories used in photography and video production have also been described.
11.5 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Belavadi, V. (2013). Video Production. Oxford University Press. Blain Brown, D. (2017). The cinematographer's companion: A guide to location lighting techniques (5th ed.). Burlington, MA: Focal Press. Box, H. (2018). Television production handbook (12th ed.). Boston, MA: Wadsworth. Millerson, G. (2010). Lighting for television and film (3rd ed.). Oxford, UK: Focal Press. Viera, P. (2014). The television lighting handbook (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge.
11.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check You Progress 1 1. a. High-key lighting is a lighting technique where the difference between the brightest area and the darkest area in the image is very low. It has low contrast. It means, there is not much variation in the amount of light in the entire frame. On the other hand low-key lighting is just opposite to the high-key lighting. In scenes or pictures where low-key lighting is used, the contrast is greater. That is, there is a considerable difference in the amount of light at the brightest and darkest areas in the frame. b. Short lighting is a technique used in photography, film production, and video production. In this lighting setup we position the key light source to illuminate the side of the subject's face that is farther from the camera. On the other hand in broad lighting setup, the subject is positioned facing slightly away from the camera. The key light illuminates the side of the

face that is closer to the camera. This creates a broad, even illumination Shot Sizes & across the face, with softer shadows and highlights than would be seen Camera Angles in a more dramatic lighting setup. Check You Progress 2
1. When we place the key light at the 900 from the camera, it illuminates
half of the subject's face. Half of the face is bright and half is in the shadow. Since this type of light splits the face into two almost equal parts (half illuminated and half dark), it is called split lighting. It creates dramatic effects.
2. The lighting which produces very minimum shadow is called flat
lighting. In flat lighting, you will find very little contrast. It lacks depth and details. It gives uniform illumination across the frame. If we illuminate the entire frame area with a large light source, the effect of flat lighting is created. The effect of flat lighting can also be created by illuminating a subject from the front. The camera mounted lights result in flat lighting. If we keep the intensity of key and fill lights the same (1:1), it will create flat lighting. Check You Progress 3
1. Gels, reflectors, softboxes, scrims, barndoors
2. d. Colour Temperature Orange
3. a. True
4. a. True
5. In cameo lighting, we place the subject in front of the dark background.
Light is thrown only to the subject from the front and the background is completely dark. Cameo lighting can be done with the help of spot lights.

UNIT 12: SHOT SIZES & CAMERA ANGLES
& Videography Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 Moving Images
12.3 Shot, Scene and Sequence
12.4 Shot Sizes
12.4.1 Extreme close-up (ECU)
12.4.2 Close-up (CU)
12.4.3 Medium close-up (MCU)
12.4.4 Medium shot (MS)
12.4.5 Medium long shot (MLS)
12.4.6 Long shot (LS)
12.4.7 Extreme long shot (ELS)
12.5 Camera Angles
12.5.1 Eye-level shot
12.5.2 High-angle shot
12.5.3 Low-angle shot
12.5.4 Other Camera Angles
12.6 Other Types of Shots
12.7 Let Us Sum Up
12.8 Further Readings
12.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
12.0 INTRODUCTION
When we record a sequence of still images and show them at a particular speed, it creates an illusion of motion and we see moving images. Movies, videos, and animations are all examples of moving images. It is a visual art form that is used to convey desired messages. Generally, we use moving images with a combination of sound. If you want to use this art form, you must have an understanding of visual language. Visual language has its own grammar. Shot sizes, camera angles and camera movements are its important elements. In this unit, we shall discuss the different types of shot sizes and camera angles used in filmmaking or video programme production. Camera movements will be discussed in the next unit. Once you will understand the basics of visual language, you can use it in different types of audiovisual productions, such as - television news 168 programmes, documentary films, short films, etc. For example, if you know the

English language, you can use this language for writing different pieces like Shot Sizes & stories, news reports, science books, articles, novels, etc. The style of language Camera Angles may be different in story writing, news writing or science book writing, but the basics and grammar of the language will remain the same. The same logic is also applicable to visual language.
12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: * understand the concept of moving images; * know the different types of shot sizes used in film and video production; * describe various camera angles; * explain the purposes of different types of shot sizes and camera angles; and * select suitable shots for your film or video production.
12.2 MOVING IMAGES
We see images moving in films, videos, animations and multimedia content. Moving images capture a large share of our media and entertainment industry but the interesting thing to note is that we cannot record true motion or movement. We can record only still images (frames) and we show them in a way that creates an illusion of motion. Following images explain this concept: (Image - 1) (Image - 2) (Image - 3) Here, we have three images with different postures of hands. In Image-1, both hands are slightly away from the body. In image-2, the hands are slightly farther away from the body and in image-3, the hands are even farther away from the body. All three are still images but if you show them in quick succession, it will create an illusion of motion of the hands. Illusion of motion is created by showing a series of consecutively recorded still images in speedy succession. All types of moving images including films and videos work on the same concept. We experience motion due to eye and brain functions. Theories of Persistence of Vision and Phi-phenomena explain the experience of motion by humans. Traditionally, Persistence of Vision was thought to be the cause of this motion illusion. According to this theory, the human eye cannot distinguish between still images if they come at high speeds (typically more than 16 images in

Digital Photography a second) and view them in continuity. If we show a series of continuously & Videography recorded still images in quick succession, illusion of motion will be created. But this theory has already been challenged.
12.3 SHOT, SCENE AND SEQUENCE
Similar to written language, visual language (the language of moving images) also has different units. You can equate letters with frames, words with shots, sentences with scenes, paragraphs with sequences and the whole story with the complete film. Shot, Scene and Sequence are three important units of the visual language of moving images. In this section we shall discuss them in detail. Shot: Though the letter is the smallest unit of written language, it lacks meaning. Collection of letters forms a word which carries some meaning. So, we can say that word is the smallest meaningful unit of the written language. Similarly, a shot is the smallest meaningful unit of the visual language of moving images . It is a collection of frames. As we discussed above, frame is a still image recorded by the camera and many frames together form a shot. As you know that by playing sequential still images at a certain speed, the experience of movement can be created, and all the moving images products work on the same concept. In filmmaking or video production, you can define a shot as the recording or footage without any break. A shot is single unbroken footage or recording. You can also say that shot is footage or recording from one cut to another cut. The duration of a shot may be a few seconds or up to several minutes. If you see any film cautiously you can easily identify different shots. Scene: The scene is comparatively a bigger unit and may be composed of many shots. A scene presents a small unit of the story and takes place at a specific location and time. If the location or time changes, the scene will change. Let us take few examples. We are showing that a character is reading a book in his bed at night. After some time, he turns off the lights and falls asleep. The next day morning, he wakes up with the harsh sound of his alarm. Here, we have two scenes as time changes. The first scene is of night and the second scene is of day. In the same way, if we show that a woman is doing some work in her house in the morning and after some time she leaves her house and walks to the park next to her house. The scene also changes here due to changing location. Therefore, if the place or time changes, the scene will also change. Sequence: As we discussed above, if scenes are sentences then sequence is a paragraph. A sequence is made up of many scenes which delivers a unit of the narrative. Different scenes of a sequence may be connected with unity of time or location or event or theme. We can discuss this with an example. Take the marriage sequence of a film as an example. When we say marriage sequence, it means that this sequence contains all the scenes related to the marriage of the characters in the story. This sequence may include the bridegroom's wedding procession, the bride's room scene where she is talking to her friends, the discussion scene between the bride's father and the bridegroom's father, scene of marriage rituals, and all other scenes related to that particular marriage. Here this marriage sequence shows a small unit of the whole story.

Shot Sizes &
12.4 SHOT SIZES
Camera Angles
Shots can be classified by the size of the subject captured in the frame. Here, you need to know about the two terms: 'subject' and 'frame'. First, what do we mean by subject here? In this context, the subject may be the character or any object which is the centre of interest for the camera. In other words, a subject is a character or object which will be in focus during recording. More than one character or object may also be treated as subjects. Now, what is the frame? Actually, frame is a still image and the smallest unit of any film or video. As we discussed earlier, a number of frames together make a shot. In this context, frame is the space of that still image available to a director or cinematographer to compose a shot. You can also say that frame is an area which is captured by a camera and visible to the audience. Anything which is out of frame during shooting is not part of the film because it is not captured by the camera. On the basis of the subject's size captured in the frame, shots can be divided into three basic types: close-up, medium shot and long shot. These three basic shots can further be divided into few other types. So, in general, on the basis of the subject's size captured in the frame, you can classify shots into seven following types: i. Extreme close-up (ECU) ii. Close-up (CU) iii. Medium close-up (MCU) iv. Medium shot (MS) v. Medium long shot (MLS) vi. Long shot (LS) vii. Extreme long shot (ELS) Now, we shall discuss these shot sizes in detail.
12.4.1 Extreme close-up (ECU)
It is closer than the close-up shot and captures a part of the face. It is abbreviated as ECU. An extreme close-up shot is used to show the important details of a smaller area. You can use this shot to reveal some important marks on your character's face or some important and meaningful activities of your character's eyes, lips etc. It helps to show detailed facial expressions and emotions. An extreme close-up of a character's tearful eyes helps the director to reveal the character's emotion beautifully. Extreme close-ups of shining teeth are commonly used in the advertisement films of different dental products. Figure (1.1) is an example of the extreme close-up shot.

& Videography Figure 1.1 Extreme close-up shot
12.4.2 Close-up (CU)
It captures the whole face. The whole frame is mainly covered with the face only, so negligible background information is available. Close-up shots are used to show facial expressions and emotions. These shots provide opportunity to actors and actresses to show their acting skills. Close-up shots are frequently used as reaction shots to show the character's reactions and emotions. It is abbreviated as CU. Figure (1.2) shows an example of close-up shot. Figure 1.2 Close-up shot
12.4.3 Medium Close-up (MCU)
A medium close-up shot is generally framed from just below the armpit or lower chest. This shot is also called head and shoulders shot because it captures head and shoulders both. Bust shot is one more popular name of medium close- up. You can use this shot to show your character's reactions and emotions. It reveals some information about the background. Figure (1.3) shows an example of medium close-up. Figure 1.3 Medium close-up shot

12.4.4 Medium Shot (MS) Shot Sizes &
Camera Angles
It is also called as mid-shot. In a medium shot, you frame your character from just above or below the waist. It reveals information about the background. You can capture the body language and the activities of the characters. Figure (1.4) shows an example of medium shot. Figure1.4 Medium shot
12.4.5 Medium Long Shot (MLS)
It is an intermediate shot between the medium shot and the long shot. In a medium long shot, you should frame your character from just below or above the knees. It is also called as three-quarters shot because it covers three quarters of your character. The medium long shot reveals enough information about the background. You can show the activities of your characters through the medium long shot. Figure (1.5) shows an example of medium long shot. Figure 1.5 Medium long shot
12.4.6 Long Shot (LS)
Sometimes it is also known as wide shot or full shot. In the long shot, you frame the full body from head to toe. Long shot puts your character in the context. You can use this shot to establish your location. It provides detailed information about the background. You can show the activities of your characters with clear background details through this shot. Figure (1.6) shows the example of a long shot. Figure1.6 Llong shot (LS)

Digital Photography 12.4.7 Extreme Long Shot (ELS) & Videography In this shot, background or location is more dominant than the character. It gives a larger view of the location. An extreme long shot is often used as an establishing shot to establish the location. Generally, it comes at the beginning of any film or sequence to show the larger view of the location. You can see the example of an extreme long shot in figure (1.7). Figure 1.7 Extreme long shot Activity 1 Shoot short video clips showing all seven shot sizes. You can use any type of video camera including a smartphone. Check your progress: 1 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is shot ?

2. Explain the difference between scene and sequence.

3. When should we use a close-up shot?

4. Which of the following is used to establish a location ?
a. Medium Shot b. Extreme long shot

c. Extreme close-up Shot Sizes &
Camera Angles
d. Close-up
5. Persistence of Vision is related to
a. Contrast colour b. Camera model c. Illusion of motion d. Recording format
12.5 CAMERA ANGLES
Camera angle tells about the placement of the camera in relation to the subject. For example, if the camera is placed at a higher place to the subject, it will be called high-angle and the vice-versa. Camera angle plays a very important role in the recording of moving images. It is a significant element of visual grammar that contributes to meaning creation. If you shoot the same subject with different camera angles, different meanings may be created. So, the camera angle is used as an important tool for visual storytelling. You can also divide shots into different types on basis of the camera angle used. In this section, we shall discuss the different camera angles in detail.
12.5.1 Eye-level shot
It is a normal shot. You can frame an eye-level shot by placing the camera at the eye level of the character. The eye-level shot provides a normal viewing effect. It is a common and most utilized shot. All the pictures from the figure (1.1) to (1.7) are the examples of eye-level shots.
12.5.2 High-angle shot
As the name suggests, in a high-angle shot, the camera is placed at a higher level. It gives an effect as though you are looking down at the subject. You can use a high-angle shot to show your character weaker or less important. High- angle shots are also used to show those things which cannot be shown through an eye-level shot. Figure (1.8) presents an example of a high-angle shot. Figure1.8 High-angle shot

Digital Photography 12.5.3 Low-angle shot & Videography In this type of shot, you place the camera at a lower level. It gives the effect as though you are looking up at a taller or bigger thing. The low-angle shot makes the subject stronger, important and dominant. Figure (1.9) is an example of a low-angle shot. Figure 1.9 Low-angle shot
12.5.4 Other Camera Angles
In addition to these three fundamental camera angles (eye-level, high-angle and low-angle), there are some other angles used in video or film production. Here, we shall discuss them briefly. i. Bird's eye view shot: This shot provides a view as if a bird observing something on the ground from the sky. It is also called an overhead shot. In this type of shot, you place the camera just above the subject and location. This shot gives a complete view of the location where the action is going on. You can use this shot to reveal information about the location and action which are not possible to be shown through a high- angle shot. Figure (1.10) shows an example of a bird's eye view shot. Figure 1.10 Bird's eye view shot

ii. Worm's eye view shot: It is an extreme low-angle shot. It gives an effect Shot Sizes & similar to a worm looking at the bigger or taller things. You can frame Camera Angles a worm's eye view shot by placing the camera far below the subject. It exaggerates the subject's appearance and makes it very strong and dominant like a giant. Figure (1.11) shows the example of a worm's eye view shot. Figure 1.11 Worm's eye view shot iii. Dutch Angle or Dutch Tilt : It is also known as canted angle. The Dutch angle allows the camera to roll on its axis so that the horizon is not parallel with the bottom of the frame. The desired effect of a Dutch angle is as if the viewer tilts his head from one side to the other. Generally, Dutch angle is used to evoke tension, uneasiness, stress or a psychological breakdown of the characters. Activity 2 Shoot the same subject from eye-level, high angle and extreme low angle (worm's eye view). Compare the results. Check your progress: 2 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is camera angle ?

2. How is high-angle shot different from eye-level shot ?

3. When should we use low-angle ?

177

Digital Photography 4. Which of the following is called overhead shot ? & Videography a. Medium Shot b. Bird's eye view shot c. Worm's eye view shot d. Low-angle shot
5. Generally, Dutch angle is used to evoke tension.
a. True b. False
12.6 OTHER TYPES OF SHOTS
There are few other types of shots which are used frequently in filmmaking or video production. You should know about these shots. These are following:
1. Over-the-shoulder shot (OTS): Figure (1.12) shows an example of
over-the-shoulder shot. The name of this shot refers to the placement of camera just behind the shoulder of a character, presenting a view of what the character sees. Generally, it is used to show conversations between two characters. Figure 1.12 Over-the-shoulder shot (OTS)
2. Point-of-view shot (POV): Point-of-view shot shows the things from
the viewpoint of a character. Figure (1.13) shows the example of a point- of-view shot. Figure 1.13 Point-of-view shot

3. Reaction shot: Reaction shot is very important in visual storytelling. Shot Sizes &
You frame this shot to show the reaction of a character on any dialogue Camera Angles or action. For example, just imagine a scene in which three characters are discussing something. One of the characters reveals a shocking information. Now you will have to show the reactions of other two characters through reaction shots. Reaction shots show the facial expressions and emotions of the characters. Generally, reaction shots are framed as close-up or medium close-up shots. An example of reaction shot is shown in figure (1.14). Figure 1.14Reaction shot
12.7 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we have discussed the different shot sizes and camera angles. If you want to write a story, knowledge of the language is a must. In the same way, moving image productions (films, documentaries, etc.) require the understanding of visual language and its grammar. Once you understand the visual language well, you can use it to produce any type of film, documentary, television news programmes, etc. Shot sizes and camera angles are very crucial elements of visual grammar. A proper understanding of these elements will help you to produce good films or documentaries which can communicate their message properly, smoothly and interestingly.
12.8 FURTHER READINGS
Belavadi, V. (2013). Video Production. Oxford University Press. Macelli, J. V. (2005). Five C's of Cinematography: Motion Picture Filming Techniques. Thompson, R., & Bowen, C. (2009). Grammar of the Shot. Taylor & Francis.
12.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check your progress: 1
1. Shot is a recording or footage without any break. A shot is a single
unbroken footage or recording. You can also say that the shot is footage or recording from one cut to another. The duration of a shot may be a few seconds or several minutes.

Digital Photography 2. Generally, a scene is composed of several shots. A scene presents a & Videography small unit of the story and takes place at a specific location and time. If the location or time changes, the scene will change. On the other hand, a sequence is made up of many scenes which delivers a unit of the narrative. Different scenes of a sequence may be connected with unity of time or location or event or theme.
3. Close-up shots are used to show facial expressions and emotions. These
shots provide opportunity to actors and actresses to show their acting skills. Close-up shots are frequently used as reaction shots to show the character's reactions and emotions.
4. b. Extreme long shot
5. c. Illusion of motion
Check your progress: 2
1. Camera angle tells about the placement of the camera in relation to the
subject. For example, if the camera is placed at a higher place to the subject, it will be called high-angle.
2. Eye-level shot is a normal shot. We can frame an eye-level shot by
placing the camera at the eye level of the character. The eye-level shot provides a normal viewing effect. It is a common and most utilized shot. On the other hand, in a high-angle shot, the camera is placed at a higher level. It gives an effect as we are looking down at the subject. We can use a high-angle shot to show your character weaker or less important.
3. If we want to show the subject stronger, important and dominant, we
should use low-angle shots.
4. b. Bird's eye view shot
5. a. True

UNIT 13: CAMERA MOVEMENTS
Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 What is Camera Movement ?
13.3 Camera Movements : Different Types
13.3.1 Pan
13.3.2 Tilt
13.3.3 Dolly/Track
13.3.4 Other Camera Movements
13.4 Camera Movements and Composition Rules
13.5 Let Us Sum Up
13.6 Further Readings
13.7 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
13.0 INTRODUCTION
Camera movement is a crucial aspect of any type of audio-visual production, be it television production or film production or content generation for online platforms. The proper knowledge of different camera movements is essential if you are shooting videos using any type of camera - professional to smartphones. Different types of camera movements are used with different purposes. They aid in the process of storytelling. Appropriate camera movements can create emotion, show different perspectives, and add interest to a video. In this unit, we shall discuss different types of camera movements in detail.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this unit, you will be able to: * understand meaning and purposes of camera movements; * describe the different types of camera movements; * explain the uses for different camera movements; and * discuss the some important rules related to camera movements.
13.2 WHAT IS CAMERA MOVEMENT ?
There are two types of movements in the recording of moving images. First is the movement of character/s and second, movement of the camera. Here, we shall discuss the movement of camera that is very crucial in film or video production. You can classify the shots into two following broad categories on the basis of the movement of the camera:

Digital Photography i) Static shot & Videography ii) Dynamic shot i) Static shot: If you don't move the camera during recording of a shot, it will be called a static shot. In static shots, the camera does not move, only characters can move. In this case the frame is fixed and the characters are moving in or out of the frame. We can understand it with an example. Example : Imagine, there is a shot of an office room. The position of the camera is fixed and three people sitting in that room are talking about the new policy of the government. After a few seconds two more persons enter the room and join the discussion. After some time everyone except one goes out of the room. The person left in the room dials someone via the landline phone. In this example, the frame is fixed and the various characters are moving in that fixed frame. So, this is an example of a static shot. ii) Dynamic shot: Dynamic shots are taken by the moving camera. If you move your camera during the recording of a shot, it will be classified as a dynamic shot. For example, two persons are talking to each other angrily in your shot, then the camera moves to left for showing the presence of few other people. It will be counted as a dynamic shot. Camera movement refers to the movement of a camera while recording a shot. It is an important element of the visual language. It helps in storytelling and getting the involvement of the audience. Camera movements can also create or add emotions in a shot. The type of movement and the speed of movement both create some meanings. Camera movements are very important in filmmaking and you must know about the commonly used camera movements.
13.3 CAMERA MOVEMENTS : DIFFERENT TYPES
There are many different types of camera movements. They are used for various purposes. In this section, we shall discuss the different types of camera movements and their uses.
13.3.1 Pan
Pan is a horizontal movement in which you can move your camera from right to left or left to right. In panning, camera mount stays stationary. Panning gives an effect like looking from side to side while standing at one place. You can use pan to follow the movement of a character or to reveal the information about any place. Figure (1) displays the pan movement.

Camera Movements
Figure 1 Pan Movement Some important use of pan movement are as follows : Follow a moving character/subject: We can use PAN movement to track a subject as they move horizontally across the frame. For example, in a chase scene, we can pan the camera to follow the running character as s/he move through the road. Show a large scene: We can use this movement to show a large scene or landscape. For example, a camera can pan across a city skyline to establish the setting of a movie. Reveal a hidden object or character: You can also use PAN movement to reveal a hidden object or character in the scene. For example, a camera can pan from a character's face to a hidden object s/he is looking at, creating suspense and tension. Create a sense of disorientation: We can use PAN movement to create a sense of disorientation or chaos. For example, a camera can pan rapidly back and forth during a fight scene, creating a sense of confusion and excitement.
13.7.2 Tilt
Tilt is a vertical movement in which you can move your camera up or down. Like pan, camera mount stays stationary in tilting also. Tilting gives an effect like looking up or down while standing at one place. Tilt movement can be used to follow the upward or downward movements of your character. You can use this movement to reveal more information about your location. Figure (2) shows the tilt movement. Figure 2 Tilt Movement 183

Digital Photography 13.7.3 Dolly & Videography Dolly or track is a movement of the camera towards or away from the subject. If you move the camera towards the subject, it will be called 'dolly in' or 'track in' whereas if the camera goes away from the subject, it will be called 'dolly out' or 'track out'. Wheeled camera mounts and tracks are used for this movement. This movement maintains the normal perspective. It gives the effect as you are moving towards or away from the subject. Figure (3) explains the dolly or track movement. Figure (3) Dolly movement Check your progress: 1 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How is Pan different from Tilt ?

2. Explain the terms - Dolly in and Dolly out.

13.7.4 Other Camera Movements
Apart from these three basic camera movements, there are some other camera movements that are useful in film or video production. We shall now discuss them. i. Pedestal: Pedestal is a type of camera mount generally used in studios. In pedestal up/down, the camera moves up and down without any change in its vertical or horizontal axis. You should not be confused between tilt and pedestal. In tilt, camera mount stays stationary, there is no change in the height of camera mount, only camera pivots up or down. But

in pedestal, the height of camera mount changes. In pedestal up, the Camera Movements camera moves upward as the height of the camera mount increases and vice versa in pedestal down. It is difficult to do this movement with general tripods. Figure (4) explains the pedestal movement. Figure 4 Pedestal Movement ii. Zoom: Technically zoom is not a camera movement because it does not require any movement of the camera. Zooming changes the focal length of a zoom lens. While zooming in, you increase the focal length and as a result, the angle of view is narrowed. 'Zoom in' magnifies the subject and removes a few elements from the frame due to narrowed angle of view. On the other hand, in zooming out, the focal length is decreased and the angle of view is widened. As a result, 'zoom out' reduces the size of the subject and includes more elements into the frame located around the subject. You should not be confused between dolly and zoom. 'Dolly in' gives an effect like you are coming towards the subject. It provides normal perspective shifts, but 'zoom in' just magnifies the subject. In 'dolly in' you feel the depth of space but 'zoom in' lacks it and looks artificial. iii. Dolly Zoom: It is also called the Vertigo Effect because it was first used by the famous director Alfred Hitchcock in his 1958 film Vertigo. Dolly Zoom or Zolly is a combination of Dolly and Zoom in the opposite direction. This means, the dolly-in will be done with the zoom-out and the dolly-out will be paired with the zoom-in. But you have to do both movements simultaneously. For example, you can achieve this effect by dolly-in and zoom-out at the same time. You can use this technique creatively in your production. iv. Truck: Like dolly, truck is also a camera movement performed with the help of wheeled camera mounts and tracks, but in trucking, you move the camera sideways. If you move the camera right, it is called 'truck right' or if you move the camera left, it is called 'truck left'. You should not be confused between 'pan' and 'truck'. In 'pan', camera mount (tripod or pedestal) stays stationary only camera moves right or left on its axis, but in trucking, the whole camera mount moves right or left along with the camera. For example, if you want to stay with your character who is moving straight, you can use the 'truck movement'. Figure (5) demonstrates the truck movement.

& Videography Figure 5 Truck Movement v. Arc: When you truck your camera on a curved path, it is called arc. Arc movement can be arc right or arc left. In this movement, camera moves around the subject in a semicircle. You can use arc movement to reveal more information about your subject, to shoot a moving subject or to bring visual variety in your production. Figure (6) shows the arc movement. Figure 6 Arc movement vi. Crane movements: In filmmaking or professional video production, cranes are frequently used. The crane is an equipment which has a long arm and the camera can be mounted on that. We can perform many movements with the help of crane. 'Crane up' and 'crane down' are used for the movement of crane arm upward and downward along with the camera whereas 'tongue left' and 'tongue right' are used for left and right movements of the crane arm. With the help of crane, we can do multiple camera movements. A camera mounted on a crane can be operated manually or with the help of remote control. Generally, the small cranes are called jibs. You can use crane movements for various purposes. For example, you can shoot a subject from high angle and then come to eye-level in one shot with the help of crane movements. Cranes can help to take bird's eye-view and other high angle shots. With the help of crane, you can combine multiple movements and get the desired effects.

vii. Handheld camera movements: If the camera operator holds the camera Camera Movements in his/her hands during shooting, it is called handheld camera shoot. In handheld camera shoot, camera is not mounted on tripod or any other camera mounts. Handheld camera shoot provides greater freedom for different movements but at the cost of jerks and shakes. You can see the use of handheld cameras in news gathering because many times the camerapersons of news channels do not find enough time and space to fix their cameras on tripods. Documentaries also use the handheld camera shots. Sometimes handheld camera is used purposefully to create certain effects. You can use shaky handheld camera shots to show nervousness, instability and anxiety. These shots can also be used for other creative purposes. viii. Movements with the help of camera stabilizers: Camera stabilizers are equipment which enable the smooth and shake-free handheld camera movements. Variety of camera stabilizers are available from simple to complex ones. Steadicam is the leading brand. The camera operator can wear suitable stabilizer and mount the camera on it. Now s/he can move anywhere and on any type of surface. These camera stabilizers provide a great degree of freedom for different complex camera movements. Suppose you are a camera operator and a camera mount is fitted on your body with a technology to minimize the shakes created by the human body, now you are free to move during shoot. Just think about the degree of freedom you can enjoy during shooting. Check your progress: 2 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is Vertigo effect ?

2. Discuss the use of handheld camera movements.

3. Explain the Arc movement.

Digital Photography 4. Which of the following is not a camera movement ? & Videography a. Pan b. Tilt c. Tripod d. Dolly
5. Dolly and Zoom have the similar effects.
a. True b. False
13.9 COMPOSITION RULES
We have already discussed several composition rules in a Unit on Picture Composition of this course. We discussed them in the context of still photography but as we know that moving images are also made up of still images (frames), so those rules apply here as well. Now we shall discuss some more rules which are useful in moving images. i. Do not cut on joints: While composing shots, do not cut your characters on the joints (elbow, waist, knee, etc.). Direct cut on the waist or elbow or knee creates a jarring image. We should cut at a little higher or lower than the joints. ii. 180 Degree Rule: You can understand the 180 degree rule with the following diagram. Figure (7) 180 Degree Rule In this diagram, there are two characters interacting with each other. There is an imaginary line of action or axis of action. According to the 180-degree rule, while shooting this scene, we should not cross this imaginary line of action. We should keep our camera at only one side of the line of action otherwise positional (left-right) relationship of character will change and it will create confusion in the viewers mind.

Following diagram (Fig-8) shows the effect (reverse cut) of the violation of 180 Camera Movements degree rule that is crossing the straight imaginary line of action. It changes the right-left relationship of the characters which may cause confusion. Figure (8) Although the 180 degree rule should be followed in cinematography, this rule can be broken purposefully at times for the desired effects. Activity 3 Use dolly in and zoom in to shoot the same subject. Compare both the clips and write down your observations. Check your progress: 3 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is 180 degree rule.

13.5 LET US SUM UP
In short, we can say that camera movement is an important component of visual language which helps in telling the story effectively. If you want to create quality audio-visual content, you must have a proper understanding of various camera movements and their uses. In this unit, we discussed various popularly used camera movements such as pan, tilt and dolly. Some other camera movements, such as pedestal, truck, arc, crane, and handheld, have also been talked about. The unit also includes a combination of dolly and zoom also known as zolly or Vertigo Effect. Finally we explained some compositional rules related to camera movement, for example - the 180 degree rule. This unit tried to provide detailed information about camera movements.
13.6 FURTHER READINGS
Belavadi, V. (2013). Video Production. Oxford University Press. Macelli, J. V. (2005). Five C's of Cinematography: Motion Picture Filming Techniques. Thompson, R., & Bowen, C. (2009). Grammar of the Shot. Taylor & Francis.

13.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
& Videography
ANSWERS
Check your progress: 1
1. Pan is a horizontal movement in which you can move your camera from
right to left or left to right. In panning, camera mount stays stationary. Panning gives an effect like looking from side to side while standing at one place. On the other hand, Tilt is a vertical movement in which you can move your camera up or down. Like pan, camera mount stays stationary in tilting also. Tilting gives an effect like looking up or down while standing at one place.
2. Dolly in - Movement of the camera towards the subject is called 'dolly in'.
Dolly out - If the camera goes away from the subject, it will be called 'dolly out' Wheeled camera mounts and tracks are used for these movements. Check your progress: 2
1. Dolly Zoom or Zolly is called the Vertigo Effect because it was first
used by the famous director Alfred Hitchcock in his 1958 film Vertigo. Dolly Zoom or Zolly is a combination of Dolly and Zoom in the opposite direction. This means, the dolly-in will be done with the zoom-out and the dolly-out will be paired with the zoom-in. But you have to do both movements simultaneously.
2. If the camera operator holds the camera in his/her hands during
shooting, it is called handheld camera shoot. In handheld camera shoot, camera is not mounted on tripod or any other camera mounts. Handheld camera shoot provides greater freedom for different movements but at the cost of jerks and shakes. You can see the use of handheld cameras in news gathering because many times the camerapersons of news channels do not find enough time and space to fix their cameras on tripods. Documentaries also use the handheld camera shots. Sometimes handheld camera is used purposefully to create certain effects. You can use shaky handheld camera shots to show nervousness, instability and anxiety. These shots can also be used for other creative purposes.
3. When you truck your camera on a curved path, it is called arc. Arc
movement can be arc right or arc left. In this movement, camera moves around the subject in a semicircle. You can use arc movement to reveal more information about your subject, to shoot a moving subject or to bring visual variety in your production.
4. c. Tripod
5. b. False
Check your progress: 3
1. According to the 180-degree rule, while shooting this scene, we should
not cross this imaginary line of action. We should keep our camera at only one side of the line of action otherwise positional (left-right) 190 relationship of character will change and it will create confusion in the viewers mind.

UNIT 14 VIDEO RECORDING TECHNIQUES
Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Camera and Types of Production
14.2.1 Single-camera Production
14.2.2 Multi-camera Production
14.2.3 Other Types
14.3 Video Recording in Different Situations and Useful Tips
14.4 Let Us Sum Up
14.5 Further Readings
14.6 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
In the previous units we discussed various aspects of video or television production. We talked about the structure and functioning of video cameras, lighting techniques, different shot sizes, camera angles, and camera movements. These topics cover most aspects of video recording. In this unit we are going to discuss some more video recording techniques. Single-camera production, multi-camera production, ENG and EFP will be discussed in this unit. All these production types differ mainly because of the camera and that is why we have included them in this chapter. We shall also discuss some important tips useful in video recording.
14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After going through this unit, you will be able to : * understand the difference between single-camera production and multi- camera production; * describe the ENG and EFP; and * enhance your video recording skills.
14.2 CAMERA AND TYPES OF PRODUCTION
Audio-visual productions can be classified on various grounds. We can classify them on the basis of the number of cameras involved in shooting, location of shooting, production objectives, etc. In this section we shall discuss different types of production. Firstly, if we consider the number of cameras used for production as the basis, we can divide audio-visual production into two categories - single-camera production and multi-camera production.
14.2.1 Single-camera Production
As the name suggests, this type of production uses only one camera. All shots and angles are recorded with a single camera. Single-camera shooting is popular

Digital Photography in feature films, short films, documentary films, news gathering, etc. Now we & Videography shall discuss some advantages and disadvantages of single-camera production. Advantages: Single-camera production has the following major advantages: i. Single-camera gives you more control over each shot. You can set the light and microphone according to the requirement of each shot. ii. It requires just one camera and camera crew. iii. If you are shooting in a small space, the single-camera gives the flexibility to properly set the lights and sound for each shot. The lighting and sound equipment should be positioned in such a way that they play their role properly without coming into the frame. iv. It provides flexibility to the actors/actresses. Their presence on the set is not required at the same time. Disadvantages: The disadvantages of single-camera production are as follows: i. A lot of repetition: For an effective and engaging production, it is necessary to shoot a shot from more than one angle. In single-camera production, you shoot the same shot from different angles with the same camera, so you have to repeat that shot multiple times. For example, if you are shooting a dialogue scene of two characters, you shoot it from at least three different angles. Therefore, to shoot all the three angles, the characters will have to repeat the same shot three times. ii. It takes more time in shooting. iii. Single-camera production requires more editing time.
14.2.2 Multi-camera Production
Multi-camera production involves more than one camera. Here we use multiple cameras to shoot the same action from different angles or various activities happening at the same time which are relevant to that particular show. For example, if you are shooting a studio interview, you can use three cameras. Camera-1 frames a master shot that will be a long shot covering both the interviewer and the guest sitting on the couch. Camera-2 frames medium close- up of the interviewer and camera-3 takes medium close-up of the guest. These three cameras will be connected to a video switcher or vision mixer. Here, in this case we are using three cameras to shoot one activity i.e. interview. Now just imagine that you are recording this interview with live audience and you use two more cameras to capture audience's reactions and activities. In this case, you are using five cameras to capture two activities - interview and the audience's activities. The second activity is also relevant to this programme. Multi-camera production can be used for both live and non-live programmes. This can be a studio based production or field production. Multi-camera shoots are popularly used in sports broadcasts, recording events, television interviews, panel discussions, reality shows and so on. In multi-camera shoots, the video switcher or vision mixer plays an important role. All cameras used in multi-camera production are connected to this device. Each camera has a dedicated monitor where you can see the shot composed by that particular camera. So, if you are using five cameras, you will have five 192 monitors to view the shots framed by those five cameras. The vision mixer

allows you to select any camera that will go on air in case of live broadcasting Camera Movements or for final recording in the case of non-live programme. The producer/director sits with the technical director or switcher operator and instructs him/her to select the shots. You will hear the director's/producer's commands such as - 'ready camera-3', 'take the camera-3', etc. The first command tells that some other camera is on air and director/producer now wants to make camera-3 on air. So, the first command is 'ready camera-3'. Technical director will follow the command and keep the camera - 3 ready. Now camera-3's output will be visible in preview monitor. After that director/producer gives the next command, 'take the camera-3' and technical director follows it. Camera-3 will be on air and its output will be seen in the program monitor. You can also add transitions and some other visual effects with the help of video switcher/vision mixer. Director/ producer can instruct the camera operators also with commands like, 'camera -2 give me a close-up of interviewer', 'camera-1 give me a two shot of interviewer and guest', etc. Now we shall discuss some advantages and disadvantages of multi-camera production. Advantages : The major advantages of multi-camera production are following: i. Multi-camera production takes comparatively less time to shoot as an action can be shot from different angles at the same time. ii. Since a lot of editing (shot selection, sequencing, adding transitions, etc.) have been done at the time of shooting itself, multi-camera production requires comparatively less time for post-production. iii. A live event cannot be properly recorded with a single camera. If you use a single camera, you will miss many important shots. So, in case of live events, multi-camera shoot is the best option. Disadvantages : Some key disadvantages of multi-camera production are as follows: i. It requires more cameras, other equipment and more production crew. ii. You should be more careful to place lights and microphones so that they do not come into the frames of all the cameras positioned at different places. iii. You have to use large light sources to do flat lighting so that the entire action area is properly illuminated. Flat lighting is comparatively less interesting. Many programmes use both single-camera and multi-camera shoots. You can take an example of a panel discussion on television news channel. Many discussions begin with news packages that establish the topic of discussion. In this case, the news package is shot with a single camera, but the rest of the panel discussion is recorded with a multi-camera setup.
14.2.3 Other Types
As we have discussed earlier, audio-visual productions can be classified on different grounds. Here we shall discuss some other types of productions. ENG: ENG stands for Electronic News Gathering. The objective here is to gather news content for a television news channel using various electronic devices. In electronic news gathering, we use camcorders, microphones, basic

Digital Photography lights and a team of two or three people. Nowadays one-man teams are also used & Videography for news gathering where the reporter handles everything including camera. Smartphones and selfie sticks are used to gather news content for TV channels. But sometimes the channels also use larger crew, multi-camera setup and OB vans. Normally, electronic news gathering is not a well-planned activity as you need to get ready for the shoot very quickly. For example, a TV news channel gets information about any newsworthy incident. Now it is required to send an ENG team to the spot as fast as possible. We all know about the race between news channels to show the story first. So, you can easily understand that ENG team has very less time to plan. In electronic news gathering, the main objective is to provide the news content as early as possible to the channel, so creativity and production aesthetics are on the lower priority. Speed is the key element in electronic news gathering. EFP: Electronic field production (EFP) is a term that is used mainly in the television industry. When we shoot outside the television studio, it is called electronic field production. Unlike ENG, EFP is a well-planned production type. Here we have time to plan every aspect of the production. EFP combines mobility of ENG and quality of studio production. In electronic field production, we can use multi-camera setups and larger production crew. Shooting sports events, award shows, big conferences, mega cultural, religious or business events, etc. are examples of EFP. Check your progress: 1 Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How is a multi-camera production different from a single-camera
production ?

2. What is vision mixer? Briefly discuss its use.

3. In a single-camera shoot, generally the actors have to repeat the actions.
a. True b. False
4. Live broadcast of a sports event is an example of multi-camera
production. a. True b. False

Table: 5. Panel discussions in television news channels are examples of, Camera Movements production. a. Single-camera b. Multi-camera c. None of the above
14.3 VIDEO RECORDING IN DIFFERENT
SITUATIONS AND USEFUL TIPS
There is a wide range of video recording and it is done by different types of cameras. A team making programs for television channels or well-known online platforms also record video footage with professional cameras, on the other hand a common man records video at a family function or for his/her personal social media account. So, if you look at the field of video recording, it ranges from the professional cameraman to the common man. You can find many popular vloggers who use smartphones for video recording and have millions of viewers. So, here we shall discuss how different aspects of video recording are handled differently in different situations. Content Here, we shall discuss some content related aspects. * You should always go for thoughtful recording. When you press the recording button, the purpose and composition should be clear in your mind. You know that recording is a production phase activity and is the result of a lot of planning in the pre-production phase. In case of news, we are always in a hurry but still the objective and what we want to achieve should be clear to us. * In fiction, we follow the script at the recording stage and all components of the composition (characters, background, lighting, etc.) are under our control. The characters follow our instructions, we have enough time to plan the background and props, and we have the freedom to modify them. There is plenty of time and lighting equipment available to achieve proper lighting. We have the freedom to retake. But the cases of news and documentaries are totally different. Here we deal with real events which are not in our control. For example: If you are covering the Prime Minister's rally or function, the activities of the Prime Minister are not under your control; If you are shooting a wild life documentary on lions, the actions of the lions or lioness are not under your control. You have very limited freedom with regards to lighting and backgrounds. * Video recording of fiction takes more time and planning; hence, the cameraperson can concentrate more on the aesthetic aspects whereas in news this work is mostly done in a hurry, hence more focus is on the event only. Aesthetic aspects can be compromised. * In fiction there is a whole team for video recording but for news the situation is completely different. Here, there is a very small team of reporter and cameraperson and now for many media houses only reporter is doing all the work. S/he works as both reporter and cameraperson. Smartphones are used to record news footage even in national television channels. 195

Digital Photography * The type of content - live or recorded - also affects the video recording & Videography process. Live recording is comparatively difficult as it gives no chance for mistakes and corrections. In live video, both the production and post- production phases go on simultaneously. Live editing (switching) plays an important role in this situation. * Shoot extra footage: It is always a good idea to shoot more footage than you think you will need. This gives you more options during the editing process and ensures that you have enough footage to tell your story effectively. * Don't forget to record shots for cut-ins and cutaways.
Sets and Locations
* Everything that comes into the frame plays an important role in conveying the desired meaning. The place where the characters are playing their role is important. Selecting the appropriate set or location is important. Before pressing the recording button in your camera, you must think whether the background and the surrounding environment coming in your frame is suitable or not. * You can record on set or choose a location; You can record indoor or choose outdoor but the selection should be thoughtful. Requirement of story/content, feasibility and budget play important role in this decision. * Various types of sets are available. If your budget and time permits, you can go for the real sets. These sets are recreations of actual places and require a lot of money. Abstract sets are cheaper options. They give a rough idea of the actual place. Sometimes cameo lighting (the light is only on the character and the background is completely dark) can also be used as a cost-effective alternative. * Location plays very important role in news too. For example, if you are recording news related to AIIMS, Delhi, then at the end of the story, PTC should be recorded at such a place that it can be established that the reporter is filing the story from AIIMS, Delhi. This is just an example. In all types of programs, the selection of location is important. * Modern technology has given us another option - the virtual set. You can record your video with green or blue screen and the desired background or set can be inserted with the help of post-production techniques like chroma keying. Virtual sets are used in both fiction and news.
Camera Handling
* Stable and smooth shots are key requirement for a quality video program. The camera should not shake while recording otherwise you will get shaky footage which can spoil your video. Monopods, tripods, and other camera stabilizers should be used. Sometimes shaky footage can be used for some aesthetic purpose. * We must take care that our camera movements (pan, tilt, dolly etc.) are smooth. When panning or tilting jerks should be avoided. Don't forget to level the head of your tripod. * In news gathering, many times we have to record video in a crowded place. Sometimes recording has to be done even in agitations and

protests. And many times video may have to be recorded even in the Camera Movements midst of lathi charge and firing. Apart from this, many times videos have to be recorded in natural calamities like floods, landslides, storms, earthquakes. In these situations, special care should be taken for your safety and the safety of the equipment. Along with taking care of these things, you should also try to record good and useful footage. Composition * It is very important to take care of composition in video recording. You should properly include those things in your frame which can effectively convey your message to the people. * In video recording in the field of news, the content is more important than the aesthetic aspect. Since real events are being recorded here, you cannot control the people being recorded. You should try to give the best composition according to their movements. * Even in news, there are situations where you have little control as the camera person. Like recording interviews, recording studio based programmes, special shows, docudramas, etc. In these circumstances, better shots can be framed by following the rules of composition. * The general rules of composition should be followed when recording a video. * Be sure to take care of sufficient lead room and headroom. * The use of Rule of Thirds is useful in placing your main subject. This is a common rule in video recording that suggests dividing the frame into thirds both horizontally and vertically, creating nine equal sections. The important elements in the shot should then be placed at the points where these lines intersect. * Do not cut at the natural divisions of the body while framing the shot. Like - waist, knee etc. Take a part slightly above or below it. * Shot sizes are important tools in video recording and can convey a lot of information and emotions to the viewers. Choosing the right shot size is crucial in creating an effective visual narrative. So, use different shot sizes with the right purpose. Different shot sizes should be used for the following purposes: i. Extreme long shot (ELS) - This shot size shows the subject from a distance, giving the viewer an overall view of the setting. This shot is used to establish the location or environment. ii. Long shot (LS) - Also known as a full shot, this shot shows the subject from head to toe and some of the surrounding environment. This shot is used to establish the subject's location and show their body language. iii. Medium shot (MS) - This shot shows the subject from the waist up, and is often used for dialogue scenes or to show the subject's actions in relation to their environment. iv. Close-up (CU) - This shot shows the subject's face, and is often used for emotional or dramatic impact.

Digital Photography v. Extreme close-up (ECU) - This shot shows a small portion of the subject's & Videography face, often just the eyes or mouth. It is used to emphasize emotion or detail. * Movement within the shot can add interest and excitement. This can be achieved through camera movement, such as panning or tracking, or through movement of the subject within the shot. * Don't forget to record reaction shots. A reaction shot is a shot that shows a character's response to something happening in the scene, often shown immediately after the action or dialogue that triggers the reaction. Reaction shots are an important tool in video production that can be used to convey emotion, establish relationships between characters, and create a more engaging viewing experience for the audience. Lighting Lighting is a vital aspect of video recording. It can have a significant impact on the quality and mood of the footage. Here are some lighting-related tips to keep in mind when recording video: * Use natural light whenever possible: Natural light is often the most flattering and versatile type of lighting for video. Try to use windows or other sources of natural light to illuminate your subject as much as possible. * Avoid harsh shadows: Harsh shadows can be distracting and unflattering, so try to diffuse the light using a soft box, umbrella, or other diffusion tool. This can help create a more even and flattering lighting pattern. * Consider the background: The lighting on the background can be just as important as the lighting on the subject. Make sure the background is well-lit and properly exposed to create a sense of depth and context. * Use three-point lighting: Three-point lighting involves using a key light to illuminate the subject, a fill light to fill in any shadows, and a backlight to separate the subject from the background. This can help create a more professional and polished look. * Match the colour temperature: Different light sources can have different colour temperatures, which can affect the colour of your footage. Try to use lighting sources that have a similar colour temperature, or use colour correction tools to adjust the colour temperature in post-production. * Use lighting to create mood: Lighting can be used to create different moods and emotions in your footage. For example, warm, orange-toned lighting can create a cosy, intimate mood, while cool, blue-toned lighting can create a more dramatic and moody feel. Audio * Record high-quality audio. High-quality audio is just as important as high-quality video. Use a dedicated microphone or a lavalier mic to capture clear and consistent audio. * Monitor your audio levels. Keep an eye on your audio levels throughout the recording process to ensure that your audio is not too loud or too 198 quiet.

Check your progress: 2 Camera Movements Note: Use the space given below for your answers. Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Write any three composition related precautions one should take while
recording video.

2. Why is lighting important in video recording ?

3. We should avoid harsh shadows.
a. True b. False
4. Long shot should be used to show the emotion.
a. True b. False
5. Rule of Thirds is related to
a. Lighting b. Composition c. Audio
14.4 LET US SUM UP
The camera is the core in video or television production. In this unit we discussed different types of video or TV production based on the number of cameras involved. We saw how single camera production differs from multi camera. We also talked about electronic news gathering and electronic field production. As a student of mass communication and especially electronic media, you should have an in-depth understanding of video recording tools and techniques. A lot of video recording these days is done by both professionals and common men. The internet has removed the limitations of platforms and a huge amount of video content is coming from the masses. Social media has provided huge opportunities to the hidden talents. Keeping this in mind, we have also discussed some important tips for recording videos using different types of recording equipment.

14.5 FURTHER READINGS
& Videography Belavadi, V. (2013). Video Production. Oxford University Press. Macelli, J. V. (2005). Five C's of Cinematography: Motion Picture Filming Techniques. Thompson, R., & Bowen, C. (2009). Grammar of the Shot. Taylor & Francis.
14.6 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check your progress: 1
1. Multi-camera production involves more than one camera. Here we
use multiple cameras to shoot the same action from different angles or various activities happening at the same time which are relevant to that particular show. On the other hand, single-camera production uses only one camera. All shots and angles are recorded with the same camera.
2. Vision mixer or video switcher is a device which plays an important role in
multi-camera production. All cameras used in multi-camera production are connected to this device. Each camera has a dedicated monitor where you can see the shot composed by that particular camera. So, if you are using five cameras, you will have five monitors to view the shots framed by those five cameras. The vision mixer allows you to select any camera that will go on air in case of live broadcasting or for final recording in the case of non- live programme. You can also add transitions and some other visual effects with the help of video switcher/vision mixer.
3. a. True
4. b. True
5. b. Multi-camera
Check your progress: 2
1. Multi-camera production involves more than one camera. Here we
use multiple cameras to shoot the same action from different angles or various activities happening at the same time which are relevant to that particular show. On the other hand, single-camera production uses only one camera. All shots and angles are recorded with the same camera.
2. Vision mixer or video switcher is a device which plays an important role in
multi-camera production. All cameras used in multi-camera production are connected to this device. Each camera has a dedicated monitor where you can see the shot composed by that particular camera. So, if you are using five cameras, you will have five monitors to view the shots framed by those five cameras. The vision mixer allows you to select any camera that will go on air in case of live broadcasting or for final recording in the case of non- live programme. You can also add transitions and some other visual effects with the help of video switcher/vision mixer.
3. a. True
4. b. False
200 5. b. Composition


======================================================================
=== SOURCE: MNM-030E.pdf ===
======================================================================

MNM-030
Indira Gandhi National Open University
School of Journalism and New Media Studies
THEORISING DIGITAL MEDIA
School of Journalism and New Media Studies
Indira Gandhi National Open University
New Delhi

Disclaimer: Any materials and images adapted from web-based resources in this self- learning course material are being used for educational purposes only and not for commercial purposes.
PROGRAMME COORDINATOR: Prof. K.S. Arul Selvan
BLOCK 1
Unit 1 Dr. Rachna Sharma
Associate Professor, IIMC, New Delhi
Unit 2 Dr. GeetikaVashishata
Adjunct Faculty, Manipal Institute of Communication,
MAHE, Manipal
Unit 3 & 13 Dr. Anubhav Mathur
Associate Professor, Department of Media Studies,
Bennett University, Greater Noida
Unit 4 Prof. Nandini Lakshmikantha
Former Director, Manipal Institute of Communication,
MAHE, Manipal
Unit 5 & 9 Dr. Abhay Chawla
Assistant Professor, Department of Media Studies,
GGSIP University, New Delhi
Unit 6 Dr. JayaseelanRathinasamy
Assistant Professor, PSG College of Arts & Science
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
Unit 7 Dr. Sonali Srivastav
Assistant Professor, National Institute of Fashion
Technology, Panchkula, Haryana
Unit 8 Dr. Sudarshan Yadav
Assistant Professor, Department of Mass
Communication Central University of Jharkhand, Ranchi
Unit 10 & 11 K V Kurmanath
Senior Deputy Editor, The Hindu Business Line,
Begumpet, Hyderabad
Unit 12 Dr. Sujeet Kumar
Assistant Professor, Department of Mass Communication
Central University of South Bihar Gaya
Unit 13 Dr. Anupa Lahkar
ICSSR Post Doctoral Fellow Guwahati

PRINT PRODUCTION
Mr. Sanjay Aggarwal,
Assistant Registrar,
MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi
May, 2024
Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2022
ISBN :
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. Further information about the School of Journalism and New Media Studies and the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University's office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110 068. Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the The Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU. Laser Typesetting : Akashdeep Printers, 20-Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi-110002 Printed at :

Course Contents
Pages
COURSE INTRODUCTION 7
Block 1 Communication Patterns of Digital Media 9
Unit 1 Multi-platform Communications 13
Unit 2 Mediatisation 29
Unit 3 Computer-mediated Communication 53
Unit 4 Network Society 66
Unit 5 Information Theory 80
Block 2 Critiques of Cyberspace 93
Unit 6 Post-humanism and Cyborg Manifesto 97
Unit 7 Identities and Communities Online 114
Unit 8 Pop Culture and Online Expression 127
Unit 9 Online Communication and Collaborations 154
Block 3 Analysis of Participation 171
Unit 10 Mode of Production in Cyberspace 175
Unit 11 Ideology and Digital Communication 192
Unit 12 Semiotics and Digital Communication 207
Unit 13 Issues of Big Data 225
Unit 14 Political Economy of ICTs 238

COURSE INTRODUCTION: MNM-030
THEORISING DIGITAL MEDIA
With three decades of experience with digital media platforms, this course attempts to capture the concepts of human communication through cyberspace. Multiple perspectives and various angles of scrutiny over the Units would give an opportunity to understand the nuance of online-based communication patterns. We have divided the course into three blocks. The first provides a holistic understanding of the communication patterns of digital media, the second Block takes through a critical discussion of cyberspace-based actions, and the last Block introduces the unique features of digital media into interactivity and participation. Block 1 Communication Patterns of Digital Media. We will explore the intricate dynamics shaping digital communication landscapes. Unit 1: Multi-Platform Communications help us to navigate the ever-evolving terrain of digital media, where we will analyse audience engagement and craft compelling content across diverse platforms. In Unit 2: Understanding Mediatisation, we explore the profound impact of mediatisation on human interaction, discerning its nuances and global implications across various sectors. Unit 3: Computer-mediated Communication explains the complexities of synchronous and asynchronous interactions, offering insights into psychological implications and agency within CMC. Unit 4: Network Society discusses the transformative power of interconnected networks, shedding light on Castell's perspective and its relevance in understanding contemporary social structures. Lastly,
Unit 5: Information Theory discusses the essence and applications of information
theory, bridging mathematics and communication to illuminate its role in quantifying news and communication systems. Block 2 Introduction: Critiques of Cyberspace. In this Block, we will explore on a journey of critical exploration into the complex realm of cyberspace. Within this Block, we will learn about various aspects of the digital landscape, scrutinising its implications on humanity, culture, and society. From challenging traditional notions of humanity to navigating the intricacies of online identities and communities, each Unit within this Block offers a unique perspective on the evolving relationship between humans and technology. Unit 6: Post-Humanism and Cyborg Manifesto challenges us to rethink conventional understandings of humanity, inviting us to explore the fusion of biology and technology through a post-human lens. Unit 7, Online Identities and Communities - discusses the nuanced dynamics of online identities and communities, unravelling the complexities of identity management and participation in the digital sphere. In Unit 8, we examine the intersection of pop culture and digital expression, analysing how digital media shapes and reflects cultural phenomena. Unit 9 explores the dynamics of online communication and collaborations, highlighting the opportunities and challenges digital technology presents in facilitating global interaction and teamwork. Block 3 Analysis of Participation. This Block comprises five units, each exploring distinct aspects of the intricate digital landscape. Unit 10: Mode of Production in Cyberspace illuminates the transformative power of digital platforms on economic, social, and technological fronts. Understanding these shifts is paramount for navigating modern journalism and communication. Unit 11: Ideology and Digital Communication explores the interplay between ideology and online discourse, shedding light on how

beliefs shape digital content and consumption. Unit 12: Semiotics and Digital Communication delve into signs and symbols online, unravelling how meaning is constructed and conveyed in the digital sphere. Unit 13: Issues of Big Data navigates the expansive terrain of big data, probing its impact on media while critically examining its social and ethical ramifications. Unit 14: Political Economy and ICT introduces the intricate relationship between political economy and information communication technology, dissecting ownership dynamics and evolving paradigms in the digital age. We hope that the course will be an eye-opener for understanding the nuances of digital media-based human communication patterns. The concepts discussed in this Block might provoke you to consider how communication is exchanged in cyberspace. You might be interested in learning and exploring specific aspects of digital media, and this course will help you find meaning in your curiosity about digital media.

Block-1
Communication Patterns of
Digital Media

BLOCK 1 COMMUNICATION
PATTERNS OF DIGITAL MEDIA
Digital media differs from the legacy mainstream media in multiple perspectives - it combines various media elements into one platform, gives horizontal communication flow by providing powers to individuals, and digital gadgets facilitate the immense experiences of interactions and participation more flexibly and conveniently. This network of networks gives ample scope for every stakeholder to reap significant benefits. All these characteristics of digital media are based on the simple technological features of cyberspace - encoding and decoding through fragmentations. These concepts are explained in this Block.
Unit 1: Multi-Platform Communications. In this Unit, we'll explore the dynamic
communication landscape across various platforms. From understanding media forms and formats to analysing audience engagement, we'll delve into the intricacies of digital media ecology. You'll learn to craft effective content for diverse platforms- news, entertainment, and advertising. We'll also examine the prospects and challenges posed by emerging technologies like AI and mobile communication.
Unit 2: Understanding Mediatisation. In this Unit, we explore mediatisation's
impact on human communication, distinguishing it from mediation and examining its characteristics and modes. From social to cultural realms, we delve into its influence on politics, education, and commerce. We assess both advantages and disadvantages and analyse global changes driven by mediatisation.
Unit 3: Computer-mediated Communication. In this Unit, you will learn about
the dynamic world of Computer-mediated Communication (CMC). We'll explore its nuances, from understanding its essence to dissecting its multifaceted theories. From grasping the agency within CMC to examining its psychological implications, this journey will equip you with a comprehensive understanding. By the end, you'll discern the intricacies of synchronous and asynchronous communication alongside their pivotal roles in modern-day interactions and mass communication.
Unit 4: Network Society. In this Unit, we'll discuss the intricacies of the Network
Society, exploring its definition, characteristics, and challenges. From understanding networks to examining Castell's perspective, we'll uncover the evolution of social structures and transformations in our digital landscape. By the end, you'll grasp the significance of the Network Society in navigating the complexities of our interconnected world.
Unit 5: Information Theory. This module explores the essence and applications
of information theory in communication systems. Originating from the works of Nyquist, Hartley, and Shannon, information theory intersects mathematics, probability, and engineering. Despite its mathematical roots, this Unit presents the theory non- technically, focusing on its relevance to communication and news quantification. By the end, you'll define information, trace its historical evolution, and explore its applications across disciplines. These Units will help you broaden your understanding of the communication patterns of digital media.

Communication Patterns
of Digital Media

Multi-Platform
UNIT 1 MULTI - PLATFORM
Communications
COMMUNICATIONS
Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Learning outcomes
1.2 Understanding multi-platform communications
1.2.1 Media forms and formats
1.2.2 Audiences
1.3 Digital media ecology and multi-platform capabilities
1.3.1 Processes and emerging patterns
1.3.2 Effectiveness of digital platforms with effective communication
1.4 Writing multi-platform Content
1.4.1 News
1.4.2 Entertainment
1.4.3 Advertising and Public Relations
1.5 Prospects and Challenges
1.5.1 New avenues with mobile communication, Artificial Intelligence, and ease of
learning
1.5.2 New challenges of identity theft, privacy breach, and deep fake
1.6 Let Us Sum Up
1.7 Keywords
1.8 Further Readings
1.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
1.0 INTRODUCTION
As technology transformed, the communication process also transformed. Today, we communicate with people in multiple ways through various means and media simultaneously. Observe how many communication devices you have or how you communicate on a single device, for example, your mobile phone, laptop, or the smart TV screen you have in your living room! You not only see multiple screens such as a TV screen, the screen of your personal computer (PC) or laptop and your mobile screen, but interestingly, you see and communicate with various forms and formats of content using multi-platforms on a single screen device. For example, you might have a commerce-based application on your phone; you might be visiting a social media platform such as Facebook, X (formerly Twitter), Instagram, etc.; you might be using Facetime on iPhone or text-based chat applications like WhatsApp or Telegram. It is possible that you might be communicating the same content on various platforms altogether since they are 'interoperable' and linked. We live in an age of multiple devices - personal computers, laptops, tablets, mobile phones, and Internet-based 'smart' TVs - with multiple communication platforms, forms, and formats. Everything is converging here, and "what we are seeing is 13

Communication Patterns a media industry that is as much about media production, exhibition, and
of Digital Media
distribution as it is about facilitating communication among its audience." (Marshall, 2009) Therefore, to better understand the medium, its formats, and various forms of communication associated with it, we also need to understand the changing nature of audience/s. This becomes pertinent especially when social networking sites, through removing technical barriers in content production, enable the 'audiences' to 'produce their content'. Comprehending the media ecosystem and its audiences also leads us better to equip ourselves with the writing skills for multi-platform publishing. Due to the changing roles of the audience, digital media is all-pervasive and yet contextual. In this regard, knowledge of the emerging practices, in terms of "the three Ss" - sharing, storing, and saving -in the online media and social media environment becomes essential. As the "contextualised sharing" of content is an inseparable part of media practice- comments, likes, reposting and sharing with the added content, and a range of other site-specific tools - all work together to contextualise the content to give it "a specific local meaning", it has to be seen and incorporated as a related factor for content generation (Koskela, 2004; Daisuke Okabe, 2005 cited in Hinton & Hjorth,
2013) . In this backdrop, we will learn about multi-platform media, their
practices, audiences, and content, which can enable us to create content effectively.
1.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Define and comprehend the forms and formats of multi-platform communications; Understand the processes and emerging patterns of multi-platform communication; Write and create multi-media content for different media and forms for various types of audiences; and Assess the prospects and challenges involved with the emerging multi-platform communication and publication.
1.2 UNDERSTANDING MULTI-PLATFORM
COMMUNICATIONS
Digital media is all-encompassing of:
- Physical devices - from computers, tablets, smart phones, smart TVs, etc.,
and
- Soft of structures - websites and portals, social media platforms, chat
applications and, Over-the-top or OTT services/platforms. The media content--text, visual and audio-visual--is the 'interoperable digital data'. The users/audience access it in various forms and formats on digital devices. Also, it is more 'personal' and accessed as part of the personal content. Remember how you received a funny video in the chat group? Let's discuss digital media's emerging 14 forms and formats and their audiences.

1.2.1 Media Forms and Formats Multi-Platform
Communications Today, all content is mainly created in a multimedia format using text, videos and visuals used in varied degrees. We may classify the content into long-form (blogs, video blogs/vlogs, podcasts, full-length films/documentaries) and short-form (reels, shorts, clips, memes). The content is created using traditional and new formats according to information, infotainment, and/or entertainment needs. Let us find out some of the forms and formats in detail:
1. Interview and talk-show format:
Podcasts: Podcasts are audio/video downloadable programmes based on a particular theme. Podcasts present a particular issue per episode related to the broad theme. Low-cost with a massive impact. Podcasts allow for a broader distribution through subscription-based platforms such as Spotify, Google, and Apple podcasts. A 2-to 3-hour podcast is presented in an interview or conversation format, including information and fiction/non-fiction content.
2. Article/Feature Format
Blogs/V blogs: Blogs are information or infotainment-based online journals. Blog writing may be an organisational tool for promotion or individual expression. Usually, blogs are text-based pieces of writing which incorporate 2 to 3 pictures/ videos and related hyperlinks (clickable digital references to another digital document). Feature-based content presented in audio-video format is known as Video blog or V-blog. You may find such vlogs on YouTube, a video-sharing social media platform. Blogging platforms like WordPress, Joomla, Wix, Squarespace, etc. provide writers with visual design and SEO (Search Engine Optimisation for increasing visibility on search engines) opportunities to create blogging content in attractive ways.
3. News Format:
News Feeds: News feeds are an Internet-specific format for news that works through RSS (Really Simple Syndication). RSS provides flexible codes for news stories/posts from different websites and synchronises them on the host website or device. Thus, it works as a digest of selected feeds to provide the reader with easily accessible material from different sources in one place; for example, a news feed/RSS feed indicating headlines of various stories on a single page. RSS news feeds are interactive, like social media platforms where users can see the likings and postings of others. Social Media news aggregation: Like news feeds, a news aggregator also provides curated content around the source and the topics. News aggregators provide tailored content based on 'user preferences' through a search algorithm. Google News, News 360, and Flipboard are examples of news aggregators.
4. Social Media and new formats (shorts, reels, memes):
Shorts and reels: These are the short-form video formats supported by synoptic description in text. Based on different purposes, they may be small clips cut out from the mainstream (long form) content produced by social media users on mobile phones or may be created by professional organisations for promotional activities. YouTube is the most popular platform which facilitates 15

Communication Patterns producers/users to upload, view and download such video content as "shorts". It
of Digital Media
works like a search engine to show the 'viral' content, especially the entertaining content at the top. Similarly, short videos produced by social media users showcasing 'entertainment' created out of daily life and shot through mobile phones are presented as 'reels' on the social media platform Instagram. Nowadays, professional organisations are also using the format for promotions. Meme: Meme is certainly the most revolutionary form (in a 'mash-up' format) that has evolved in digital media. This is copied content, which is then transformed by mixing it with a local context. Graham Meikle (2016) can be quoted in full to understand the form of memes: Internet memes circulate so widely through social media because many different individuals in many different contexts find them meaningful and choose to make them, share them with others, and, in doing so, make both their memes and themselves visible... They are making a remix. Increasingly, mobile phones are becoming a host of content. From ringtones and screensavers to games and applications of all sorts, a camera phone has become a centre of "new contexts for image distribution like microblogging and location- based services (LBSs) - [where] we are witnessing the emergent type of visibility. Through LBSs such as Facebook place, ambient images, and geographic locations" (Hinton & Hjorth, 2013). However, it is the intrinsic 'audience- content-media' relationship that is forming the activity and "many of these technologies could not exist in the forms they do without sharing, modification, swapping, downloading, uploading and reworking of material among users" (Goggin, 2011).
1.2.2 Audiences
To understand the changing nature of audiences, we will have to look at the older practices of audiences. As a part of media and process research, audiences have been seen as 'passive' or 'active'. However, to relate to the digital age, we may borrow the audience's classification as given by Denis Mcquail:
- the available (or potential) audience: all with the basic skill (e.g., literacy)
and/or reception capability;
- the internal audience: those who pay attention to sections, types, or single
items of content;
- The cumulative audience: the overall proportion of the potential audience
that is reached over a particular period;
- The target audience is that section of a potential audience singled out for
reach by a particular source (e.g., an advertiser). Today, we may observe all these traits in digital media users in a single time frame. This changing user behaviour has been well noted by Matt Locke (cited in Dewdney,
2014) , "such as people using mobile phones while they were watching TV to
exchange and look for information or go online to follow up on things, they had just seen for added cultural experiences.". Here, one thing which can be prominently observed is - the choices in terms of multimedia and multi-content and the personalised behaviour to use and utilise that content. Media experts observe this

as an emerging democratisation media landscape where every individual is counted Multi-Platform Communications as an important potential active user who selects and chooses from the given array of media and content. "India's deep mobile connectivity means both choices and content have been democratised" across class and creed, and the content has to be about every individual who consumes it (Ghosh, 2024). On the other hand, the media industry sees audiences as divided as never before. Segmentation and fragmentation are how audiences have been seen in media and content. With the increase in mass media devices and practices, people tend to choose between media devices and content, leading to "channel fragmentation". In turn, producers and distributors go for audience segmentation and try to reach different types of people with content tailored specifically for them (Turow, 2019). Although the practice is fluid and dynamic, to customise the content based on 'what the user wants', content is filtered through fragmentation. Moreover, it restricts the content choices given to the audiences, contrary to the 'democratisation' principle. To look at the solution, we may look at the user not from the 'audience' perspective but as a co-actor in the total media ecosystem. P David Marshall (2009) suggests the concept of "user-subjectivity" to understand new-age audience practices that take place through Internet-enabled mobile phones and software to consume and co-create the content with a social-media-driven distribution mechanism. This "enable[s] users to fabricate their own stories, their own connections, and their social networks". In Axel Bruns's (2008) words, this is "produsage" (production and usage of digital media) having "enormous commercial as well as public value". To simplify, we can see how user-generated content is produced and consumed through multi-media, multi-platforms, and multi-dimensional activities. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List any three forms of Internet-based digital media content.

2. Explain audience segmentation and fragmentation.

1.3 DIGITAL MEDIA ECOLOGY AND MULTI-
PLATFORM CAPABILITIES
Open access and interactivity in digital media transformed one-way mass communication into two-way inter-personalised mass interaction. Today, 'targeted content' is being "delivered cheaply to the user (or even for 'free')" with a widespread reach. "You get a data-driven response" - likes, comments, and most importantly,

Communication Patterns shares or reposts to amplify the brand image at zero cost, with successful audience
of Digital Media
engagement (Ghosh, 2024, Athique, 2013). The dynamics of this interchange between producer and consumer in the emerging convergence culture has been described by Henry Jenkins (2008) in terms of three basic elements:
- cross-media experiences and consumption of cultural goods;
- a participatory media culture, and
- collective or collaborative intelligence in the media experience.
Let us discuss the ecology of contemporary digital media in detail.
1.3.1 Processes and Emerging Patterns
The advent of digital media did not replace the older media but increased the range of media. Today, "people construct for themselves a mix of outlets and content that provides what they want from the media" (Tewksbury& Rittenberg, 2012). A similar extension provided for the integration and expansion of industry as explained by Miller (2011), "deregulation of the media and telecommunications industries (regulatory convergence) has led to media industry convergence, in which large media corporations have expanded both vertically within their own industry and horizontally across other media sectors." With this, media organisations can reach the audience across varied types of media using multi-platform communication. Interestingly, this new system is not limited to the 'large corporations' but creates an inclusive environment for small working groups, contractors, individual freelancers (working as content creators, designers, and managers for different platforms), and the consumers and users of digital media at large to give it a "translocally situated experience" (Hesmondhalgh, 2006 cited in Deuze, 2009). According to Deuze (2009): Not only does this perspective on convergence culture from the view of the industry offer us a more complex, hybrid, and colourful palette for looking at the production of culture, but it also opens the door to include the audience, the consumer, and the user into our framework for understanding the collisions and collusions of "old" and "new" in the contemporary media ecology. Convergence in the work and organisational structures Mark Deuze (2009) further describes the factors of media work as: The inclusion of various stakeholders - professional producers, audiences, sources, and sponsors - in the (co-)creation of media content and experiences; The integration of various media industries in a global production network; The media production process involves the complex coordination between distinctly different goals - creativity, commerce, content, and connectivity. Similar patterns in terms of work organisation can be drawn in the scheme given by Hartley (2009):
1. Agents (origination), who may be individuals or firms, characterised by
18 choice, decision-making and learning;

2. Networks (adoption), both real (social) and virtual (digital); Multi-Platform
Communications
3. Enterprise (retention), market-based organisations and coordinating
institutions (Potts et el. 2008). Convergence and hybridity in content creation The hybridity of convergent media has been explained by Dewdney (2014) as follows:
1. Overlapping practices
Deuze (2009) calls this "Convergence of place, as in the sites of media production". The practice may be further explained by the cross- referencing of content in convergent media such as YouTube shorts, Instagram reels, memes, and v-blogs that "feeds the need for satire and self-criticism in contemporary democracies" (Papacharissi, 2010).
2. Dissolving of conceptual boundaries of potential meaning
The characteristic has been described by Deuze (2009) as a "convergence of experience" where, through specific activities and interactions on digital media platforms, people generate new meanings to the content and contexts. For example, memes are created by mixing the content to create a pun- intended contextual message. The prominence of satirical content reveals a playful mood that results in a creative and "nonsensical pastiche of content that is befitting of post-modern political tastes and orientations" (Papacharissi, 2010).
3. Emergence of new hybrid practices. For example, interview-based
podcasts contain the 'personal branding' and 'indirect advertisements' of the organisation/product associated with the guest speaker. Convergent identities We may add one another feature in 'audience specific' perspective as cited by Deuze (2009), as Convergence of identity, as in notions of professional identity versus the "cult of the amateur" (Keen, 2007), or in terms of the user-producer in digital spaces.
1.3.2 Effectiveness of Digital Platforms with Effective
Communication At a time when traditional media (TV and print) was going through a 'content saturation' in terms of structured content and fatigue among the audiences, especially the younger ones, Web 2.0 emerged with a new social media culture and content formats. Social networking sites and platforms opened the opportunities for all forms of content meant for all kinds of audiences - blogs, micro-blogs, text-based content, video, and audio - be it on X, YouTube, Wikipedia, or subscription-based online radio platforms like Spotify (Athique, 2013). As we discussed earlier, user-friendly computer interfaces made the process interactive for users, and user-generated content became a key factor for the success of any digital media organisation in the new media environment. Media companies with "the gradual development of industrial standards" are increasingly "embracing audiences

Communication Patterns as co-creators of content" in newer experimental and creative ways (Deuze, 2009).
of Digital Media
(Some of the case studies are discussed in the next section). The overall socio- cultural impact of user-generated content can be mentioned as follows (OECD, 2007, cited in Hartley, 2009): Altered economics of information production; The democratisation of media production; User autonomy, increased participation, and increased diversity; Collaborative, sharing information, ideas, opinions, and knowledge; A more diverse array of cultural content; Diversity of opinion, free flow of information, and freedom of expression; However, there are challenges - inclusion, content quality, security and privacy, digital divide, cultural fragmentation, and individualisation of the cultural environment - to create an ideal society that includes all the marginalised groups. Effective content-creation Today, stakeholders in content creation are creating long-form and short-form content for user gratification and engagement. To capture depth and context, such content is created with visual effects and graphics, depending on the desired length and format. The long-form content creates 'communities' of like-minded people who read long texts, watch/listen to programmes or episodes that are 1-2 hours long and engage in ideological conversations. On the other hand, "virality-driven" short- form content attracts people more frequently than ever before. Such content is further co-created by adding up the 'personal' context and keeps on being shared. Effective distribution and consumption of content "Social media is rich in its ability to transmit text, sound, video, and images and it can transmit this information instantaneously in both directions to and from anyone around the world...in terms of its potential for effectiveness" (Quesenberry,
2016) . content carved out with "social presence" (based on interpersonal 'face-
to-face communication parameters) and "media richness" (the amount of information transmitted in each time by a particular medium) is broadcast, narrowcast (personalised and customised content shared with a limited audience), shared, and circulated across the platform. With a peer-to-peer mechanism, the content is shared with the help of digital features and tools such as - bookmarking, file storage and sharing - as part of content consumption practices. For example, long-form content, like podcasts, can be carved into smaller segments such as reels, clips, and posts to be sent to different segments of audiences on social media platforms like X, Facebook, Instagram, and LinkedIn as part of an effective communication strategy. Social media, with its embedded networking capacity, automatically leverages content outreach. It provides a venue for "organic reach" where friends or fans/followers of one user see all updates (Quesenberry). Further, the content gets boosted with the user-producers' co-creation and recreation, which remains in circulation. Thus, digital media platforms are the vehicle of effective communication through the dynamic nature of the networks and content-creation flexibilities.

Check Your Progress 2 Multi-Platform
Communications Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List the factors of media work given by Mark Deuze as part of a convergent
pattern of media organisations. Ns?

2. Describe various peer-to-peer content distribution systems used for effective
communication on digital platforms.

1.4 WRITING MULTI-PLATFORM CONTENT
Today, there are myriad opportunities to create and communicate with the audience. You may write a blog using WordPress, Tumblr, Blogger, etc.; visit imaging sites such as Flickr and video-hosting sites like YouTube, or high-end content- sharing services platforms such as Vimeo, Snapchat, SlideShare and many more. However, it is essential to select the right platform. Likewise, creating the right content for the right platform by the purpose is equally important. At the same time, considering every individual as a potential reader, content should be rich in diversity with varied contexts woven into a single text (or, given as multiple contents), as described by Denis McQuil (2010). The content should incorporate the following: a wide range of choices for audiences on all conceivable dimensions of interest and preference; many and different opportunities for access by voices and sources in society; a true or sufficient reflection in the media of the varied reality of societal experience. Let us discuss how we can enrich the content for various platforms.
1.4.1 News
As described in the previous sections, digital media spaces in news segments can be categorised as news websites and portals (as the expansion of the newspaper/ TV news organisations) and curated news services. On the convergent digital media platforms, the news portals/websites work through a 'hypermedia' ecosystem, where multiple messages or media forms can be seen instantaneously. Embedded video, visual elements, interactive graphics, infographics, pictures, slide shows, etc., are the hypermedia features given on the webpage with the essential text. In a hypermediated environment, the news portals are designed with a user interface to

Communication Patterns make the content interactive. Users click on the given interface to access and give
of Digital Media
responses to the content. Thus, the major difference between traditional news media and current media is interactivity and two-way communication. For this, we need to create content that talks, creates a dialogue for continuing conversation, and prompts the reader to take further action. Let us see how it works. While the journalistic perspective for digital writing remains the same--content rich in information and education leads the content--the commercial strategy increases the reach. For this, organisations target specific audiences with 'push notifications and news alerts through messages and app notification services. 'For a wider audience' reach, multi-platform content publishing is done to increase 'clicks and engagement'. The strategy includes selecting the platform and format, creating content, and enhancing content and Search Engine Optimisation (SEO). Selecting platform and format: Select the platform based on the requirement. For instance, a live blog/or live reporting may be streamed on Facebook and X, apart from your portal. A short form of the same content/microblog can be published on X or Facebook, and videos can be uploaded to YouTube and Instagram and shared on WhatsApp and Snapchat for instant messaging combined. Storytelling formats for telling the news differently should be practised for multi-platforms per their orientation. For example, you may tell the story by highlighting the location and focusing on the key character. Sometimes, raw videos are more impactful on X since they convey a sense of immediacy. Similarly, an audio slideshow or video interview in a journalism format will go with a YouTube channel or podcast. Content creation: The simple journalistic writing principles with a little twist work well for multi-platform publishing. Some of the tips given by Bradshaw (2019) can be described here: Tell the story with clear, concise headlines and subheadlines; do not repeat the print headline. Summarise the story. Use sub-headings to break up the article into small pieces for easy comprehension. Bullet or number lists for updates (it eases the user's reading). Indented quotes or block quotes (it works as an element of visual design as well). Use numbers instead of words for numeric data. Embolden words to highlight key phrases. Give hyperlinks, wherever possible, to link the background material. Break up text with images, galleries, charts, video, audio, maps, and other embedded media. Consider creating different videos for different platforms. For instance, a 10-second video for Instagram, a 20-second version for X, a 40-second- or 1-minute version for the Facebook page, and a full-length video on
22 YouTube.

Call the audience for action. Prompt users with the words 'watch', 'see', Multi-Platform Communications and 'listen'. Invite them to join (a live chat or live blog), meet (an interview), and find out (an explainer or backgrounder). Content enhancement and SEO: Most content management systems allow you to link platforms like Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, and X using hashtags and tags for effective communication. Write creative hashtags and use tags while referring to people. Specifically, for search engine optimisation, use maximum keywords which are related directly to your content and go for an operating system (OS) that enables your content to be screened on multiple devices - computer screens, mobile phones, and tablets - effectively with different screen aspect ratios and user interfaces. Curating the news: 'Keeping up to date with developments' is the simplest way." Indeed, in most cases, you need only click the 'share this' or 'like' buttons on a story to add it to your feed" (Bradshaw, 2019).
1.4.2 Entertainment
While cross-media experiences changed how we created and consumed entertainment-based content, there have been area-specific developments in digital media. For example, OTT or Over-The-Top digital services like Netflix, Jio Cinema, Zee5, Amazon Prime Video, Disney Hotstar, etc., are the streaming platforms for essentially entertainment-based content like films and series. However, some of them also showcase live streaming of sports events. From a multi-platform publishing and communication point of view, these platforms can be reached if one has a story to tell in a short story format. For example, Prime Video also curates short films in the regional Indian languages. Besides that, media industry convergence has robustly been used by big corporate film studios in production. For example, Jenkins (2006) uses the film The Matrix and its sequels as examples of multi-platform, cross-media convergent storytelling. The complete sequel has three movies - The Matrix, The Matrix Reloaded, and The Matrix Revolutions. However, as a part of a complete ecosystem, the filmmakers also developed - a series of short animated films titled The Animatrix, graphic novels, and two video games (Enter the Matrix and the Matrix Alternate Reality Game). Every piece of work is somewhere different yet related to the basic theme, and that is how it adds an extra layer to the story to entertain several audiences. The whole content is well-connected so that one work or content leads to the other. For instance, the cheat codes for the game Enter the Matrix are hidden in billboards included in film shots in the Matrix trilogy (You may see Jenkins, 2006 for details about the Matrix transmedia strategy using different narrative styles across media platforms). The entertainment industry regularly experiments with creative writing styles on the same theme using gaming, reels, shorts, and animation. This enriches the users' viewing experience and enhances the outreach of entertainment-based content using a multi-platform communication strategy. For example, the extensive strategy of the Star Wars series of films, cartoon films, series, video games, and apps on Pokemon is further being extended to Augmented Reality 'semi-real' games and real events, as well as mashups and co-created content by users in the form of reels and shorts. 23

Communication Patterns 1.4.3 Advertising and Public Relations
of Digital Media
The advertising industry in the digital age is observing a shift from "sales pitch" to "ideas forum". Storytelling has become crispier with "planting change-making initiatives" to sell a product. "Now an ad is compressed between several windows on your device and fights for attention. For instance, Cred, a reward-based credit card payment app, masked its ad as scrollable content" (Ghosh, 2024). Thus, advertising, and public relations firms must be more creative in creating transmedia and multi-platform communication with the user, especially when the users create competitive content in Instagram reels and YouTube videos. Therefore, storytelling and embedding the product in the story is the real challenge for advertisers. Also, brand websites and blogs offer RSS feeds to ensure updated content is automatically delivered via a feed reader. The creative industry incorporates more people and their cultures into stories. Here are two examples (Ghosh, 2024):
1. Cadbury's latest Mother's Day campaign involved creating a microsite that
asked every user to fill out some personality details about their mothers. Creators then fed every mother's description into ChatGPT and asked it to compose a song based on the information. This was set to music, and an mp3 file was created and emailed to the mothers.
2. Zomato made the daily news cycle its promotional vehicle, retweeting news
that would suit its customer base, especially those related to food, and adding its take on them. In that sense, the consumer has become the new show runner. Vlogs are another entertainment-based content that integrates ratings and reviews with geo-location sites to enhance business. Users are attracted to place-specific products and places for direct business. Activity - 1 Select an area (news, entertainment, advertising) of writing according to your choice. Identify a recent event or product. Write a blog in 4-5 paragraphs using appropriate images and links. Recreate the content in short form for Facebook, X, and Instagram.
1.5 PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES
We have seen how media content in various forms - from images to videos, films to storytelling ads, news, and interviews to discussions - continuously takes new fluid shapes to form a convergent culture. "In the world of media convergence, [where] every important story gets told, every brand gets sold, and every consumer gets courted across multiple media platforms", there is more to go with more advancements in media and communication technologies (Jenkins, 2004 cited in Miller). Let us discuss the new prospects and challenges thereof.
1.5.1 New Avenues with Mobile Communication, Artificial
Intelligence and Ease of Learning
As the number of mobile phone users is increasing, mobile applications for cross- platform publishing are coming with operating systems (OS) capable of working

on Android and iOS equally. This enables content creators to communicate more Multi-Platform Communications effectively across platforms. Software and app developers are increasingly making these apps more secure, efficient, easy to use, and fast. Similarly, AI (artificial intelligence) tools make content presentation in various forms easy. These may be used as supporting tools to enrich the work, such as summarising the long reports, and video synthesis for smooth content distribution across platforms. There are specific AI tools for specific functions. Experts tell us about various activities the different types of AI tools perform. The AI may be categorised as: Reactive AI (performance-based pre-set tools) for a set work assigned, such as the ones we use for image correction. Generative AI (memory-based 'super' AI that is self-correctable and generates images, text, and other content) for creative support. For example, image generation and correction are text-based tools that not only help synchronise the written text but also support writing creative headlines, titles, hashtags, social media captions, etc. Also, there are tools for multi-platform support to convert and customise the content for social media platforms - Facebook, X, Instagram, LinkedIn, etc. Some tools convert text to audio/video or video to text. In addition to these, AI tools offer embedded/built-in social media calendars for scheduling, organising, and publishing social media posts.
1.5.2 New Challenges of Identity Theft, Privacy Breach, and
Deepfake Autonomy and control over the communication process given to users make digital media distinctive. In the online convergent media, individuals create their day-to- day lives and realities in their stories. In this depiction of the self, the users or "produsers" feed a large set of personal data into the digital Internet-based networks. However, such amalgamation of content between users and producers is the new- age media and communication practice that not only gives creative ideas and cultural insight to the advertising and entertainment industry (as discussed in the previous section) but also poses a challenge to keep your identity intact. The easily accessible data of anyone by anyone is increasingly leading to the problem of identity theft. There are cases reported by celebrities and social media influencers where their data (pictures, videos) have been used to recreate sensational content for easy publicity. Similarly, commoners' data is used for financial fraud and cybercrime. Users' identities are also revealed by their 'profiles' on social media. Although the practice from users' perspective has been seen as positive and supportive of enhancing the 'networks, Miller (2011) takes a critical view on the digital media and social media organisations for the mechanism of profile management, "the point of creating databases and constructing profiles is to get closer to the individual: to make them measurable and thus ultimately predictable". The control of the media organisations over this data and monitoring of the same is categorised as surveillance and hence privacy breach, as it impedes users' right to control their name and other information about 'self' and, the intrusion of their virtual space in terms of 'unwarranted intrusion and intimidation'. Miller (2011) takes a more commercial perspective of surveillance since it is more connected to what we observe about deep fake. Miller suggests, "The governments

Communication Patterns do not collect the lion's share of surveillance data, but by private corporations
of Digital Media
operating under the central principle at work in the information age: that information itself has attained the status of a commodity". Thus, personal data is collected, organised, and sold to marketing and advertising firms and individuals in this' information economy'. With machine learning and technology, the data is vulnerable to creating deepfakes. According to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, a deepfake is "an image or recording that has been convincingly altered and manipulated to misrepresent someone as doing or saying something that was not done or said". The content convergence in multi-platform communication systems increases the problem as it is being used to spread misinformation, manipulate public perception, or engage in fraudulent activities. Therefore, we need to understand the multi-platform media ecosystems thoroughly and the challenges associated with data usage so that whenever we use freely accessible online data or request information or content from users, we should be vigilant and cross-check the details. Also, it indicates applying journalistic ethical practices in using solicited data only after obtaining due consent from the original source.
1.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed the nuances of the digital media ecosystem that comes with multi-platform communication opportunities. We reviewed various media forms and formats emerging with digital media. We also tried to identify the shift in the audience's needs and formations in new media. We learned about the processes and emerging patterns of multi-platform content for effective communication. By observing some good examples of creative content from the industry, we tried to obtain the required skill set for writing multi-platform content in the fields of news, entertainment, advertising, and public relations. We discussed the possibilities for easy and effective multi-platform communication using mobile communication technology and artificial intelligence. We also examined the challenges with the ever- increasing digital networks so that we may remain careful while creating content to make it authentic and credible.
1.7 KEYWORDS
Big data : Voluminous data containing information about the audience. Hybridity : Combinations/mixing-up of humans and machines as a digital process, practice, and content. Interactivity : is the ability of the computer user to technically 'interrupt' a programmed sequence; it is the process of socio- psychological engagement of the audience/user with media and communication form. RSS Feed : Rich Site Summary or "really simple syndication". It uses standard web feed formats to publish updates, including blog entries, news, audio, video, and full or summarised text with metadata (author and date 26 information).

Social bookmarking : Online service for saving, commenting, and Multi-Platform Communications sharing bookmarks of web documents/links.
1.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Athique, A. (2013). Digital Media and Society: An Introduction. Cambridge,
UK: Polity Press.
2. Bradshaw, P. (2018). The Online Journalism Handbook: Skills to Survive and
Thrive in the Digital Age. (Second Edition). New York, NY: Routledge.
3. Deuze, M. (2009). Convergence Culture and Media Work. In Holt, J. & Perren,
A. (Eds.). Media Industries: History, Theory, and Method. West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 144-156.4. Dewdney, A. & Ride, P. (2014). The Digital Media Handbook. 2nd Ed., New
York, NY: Routledge.
5. Ghosh, R. (2024, March 24). The Stories that Choose Us. Indian Express,
New Delhi Edition.
6. Goggin, G. (2011). Global Mobile Media. New York, NY: Routledge
7. Hartley, J. (2009). From the Consciousness Industry to the Creative Industries:
Consumer-Created Content, Social Network Markets, and the Growth of
Knowledge. In Holt, J. &Perren, A. (Eds.). Media Industries: History, Theory, and Method. West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 144-244.8. Hinton, S. & Hjorth, L. (2013). Understanding Social Media. London, UK:
Sage.
9. Jenkins, H. (2008). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide.
New York, NY: New York University Press.
10. Marshall, P.D. (2009). New Media as Transformed Media Industry. In Holt,
J. &Perren, A. (Eds.). Media Industries: History, Theory, and Method. West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 81-89.11. McQuail, D. (2010). McQuail's Mass Communication Theory. (6th Edition).
New Delhi, India: Sage.
12. Meikle, G. (2016). Social Media: Communication, Sharing and Visibility.
New York, NY: Routledge.
13. Miller. V. (2011). Understanding Digital Culture. London, UK: Sage.
14. Mittal, A. (2024, March 24). Voice of Pod. The Economic Times. New Delhi
Edition.
15. Papacharissi, Z.A. (2010). A Private Sphere: Democracy in a Digital Age.
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
16. Quesenberry, K.A. (2016). Social Media Strategy: Marketing and Advertising
in the Consumer Revolution. Lanham, Maryland, UK: Rowman & Littlefield.
17. Tewksbury, D., & Rittenberg, J. (2012). News on the Internet: Information
and Citizenship in the 21st Century. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 27

Communication Patterns 18. Turow, J. (2019). Media Today: Mass Communication in a Converging
of Digital Media
World. 7th Edition. New York, NY: Routledge.
1.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS:
POSSIBLE ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Three forms of Internet-based digital media content
2. Audience segmentation and fragmentation
Check Your Progress: 2
1. Mark Deuze describes the factors of media work as:
The inclusion of various stakeholders; The integration of various media industries; The complex coordination in the media production processes.
2. Bookmarking, file storage and sharing for peer-to-peer communication and
business-to-business content-sharing services are part of the multi-platform communication distribution mechanisms.

Multi-Platform
UNIT 2 MEDIATISATION
Communications Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 Understanding Mediatisation
2.2.1 Change in Human Communication by Means of Media
2.2.2 Difference Between Mediation and Mediatisation
2.2.3 Media Logic
2.3 Definitions of Mediatization
2.3.1 Definitions Based on Time
2.3.2 Definitions Based on Technology
2.3.3 Definitions Based on Theory
2.4 Characteristics of Mediatization
2.5 Modes of Mediatization
2.5.1 Networked 'Scopic' Media
2.5.2 Digitisation
2.6 Impact of Mediatization
2.7 Mediatised Areas
2.7.1 Society
2.7.2 Politics
2.7.3 Law and Public Policy
2.7.4 Culture
2.7.5 Science
2.7.6 Religion
2.7.7 Education
2.7.8 Popular Culture and Art
2.7.9 Commerce
2.7.10 Sports
2.8 Advantages of Mediatization
2.9 Disadvantages of Mediatization
2.10 Issues of Contention
2.11 Global Changes and Ongoing Transformations
2.12 Let Us Sum Up
2.13 Keywords
2.14 Further Readings
2.15 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
2.0 INTRODUCTION
You read about multi-platform communications in the last Unit. Now, imagine your life without the media.

Communication Patterns While life without media might seem simpler in some aspects, it would mean missing
of Digital Media
out on day-to-day conveniences, global connectivity, and instant access to information. It would be like stepping back in time before the widespread use of technologies like television, radio, newspapers, and the Internet. Without the media, we would not get information instantly. We must rely on word of mouth and personal experiences for information. News about distant events would be slower to reach us, and staying updated on global affairs might be challenging. Forget about binge-watching our favourite movies and TV shows. Entertainment would be limited to local live performances. The idea of global celebrities and public figures might not exist as we know it today. The media gave great impetus to society's growth and development, influencing almost every sphere of human life. This ubiquitous influence led social scientists and communication experts to study this phenomenon, which they later defined as mediatisation. Mediatisation refers to the increasing influence of media on various aspects of society, including culture, politics, religion, and everyday life. It is not just about the expansion of media content or the spread of media technologies; it encompasses the broader impact of media on society and behaviour and the perception of the people about the world. Livingstone defines it as the meta-process shaping everyday practices and social relations through mediating technologies and media organisations. Mediatisation is considered one of the major social processes, along with globalisation, individualisation, and commercialisation, that contributes to social, cultural and communication changes. With the advent of digital technologies, the speed and impact of mediatisation have increased manifold. According to Statista Consumer Insights Global, in India, daily media consumption reached 6.23 hours compared to the global average of 6.37 hours in 2023. Television and videos accounted for the highest media consumption share among the country's population in 2023, with digital media growing rapidly. There were 751.5.0 million Internet users and 462.0 million social media users in India in January 2024.2. 1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Understand the meaning and characteristics of mediatisation; Know about the growth and impact of mediatisation on other institutions like society, culture, art, education, and politics; Identify the global changes and ongoing transformation due to mediatisation; and Compare the advantages and disadvantages of mediatisation.
2.2 UNDERSTANDING MEDIATISATION
Now, the question is why there is a need for a media studies student to know about such a term as mediatisation. Before answering that, let us know about a few impacts of media technologies on our lives.

From the time we get up from our beds to sleep, we use and depend on all sorts Mediatisation of media-supported gadgets, systems, and mechanisms. For example, we get our schedules and updates at the click of a button. We conduct virtual meetings with colleagues and make phone calls to stay in touch with friends and family who are not physically present. We socialise via social media sites even while working. We shop, trade, and study on e-business, e-commerce, and education sites. We complete our work more efficiently and conveniently with facilities like e-governance, online education portals, virtual workspaces, and online banking. Even for entertainment and sports, we can have videos-on-demand, virtual reality games (VR) and augmented reality (AR) games on our TVs and mobile phones. These are some real-life examples of a Mediapolis. This media-saturated society highlights the transformational impact of media on various aspects of society, including social, cultural, and individual experiences. As an invisible and powerful agent, media uses, appropriates, and penetrates all aspects of contemporary life, creating mediatisation that underpins everyday experiences. It has even modified our sense of identity and reality. Mark Deuze rightly assessed this impact by saying, "Our life is lived in [media], rather than with media. This impact of mediatisation is so profound that it cannot be left unstudied, and as media studies students, we must understand its impact in totality. Mediatisation can be analysed at three levels. Micro, Meso and Macro levels. Micro level: It is media's interaction at the individual level (personal media usage and within a given institution, i.e. communication between family members via mobile phones) Meso level: It is interaction at the institutional level (through telecommunications media that allow one to work from home); Macro level: It is media interaction at the societal level (events of importance to the community at state, national, and global levels, be they festive, threatening, or tragic).
2.2.1 Change in Human Communication by Means of Media
There is no denying that the landscape of human communication has evolved due 31

Communication Patterns to the invention of different media technologies. Thompson has given three distinctions
of Digital Media
to capture this evolution of communication succinctly:
1. Face-to-face interaction: Involve both verbal and non-verbal expressions.
2. Mediated quasi-interaction (as in newspapers, TV, radio): Addresses an
unspecified audience.
3. Mediated interaction (telephone conversations) allows identified individuals to
interact on an equal footing. However, these traditional categorisations and interactions have diminished with the arrival of new digital technologies, such as SMS, email, video calling, and online streaming. The lines between mass and interpersonal communication have blurred, allowing for more dynamic and participatory exchanges. Let us glance over the historical growth of mediatisation, closely tied to key technological inventions and innovations in the media field. Pre-Writing Era: The period of oral tradition followed by rich oral traditions and cultural narrative. Printing Press (1440s): Johannes Gutenberg's invention of the printing press was the first revolution in the evolution of the media. It revolutionised the production of books. This invention played a crucial role in the dissemination of knowledge, the rise of literacy, and the standardisation of languages, marking an early form of mediatisation. It snatched away the authority of religion from the hands of the church and put it in the domain of the common public by printing copies of the Bible then. Telegraph (1830s-40s): The invention of the telegraph enabled near-instantaneous long-distance communication, laying the groundwork for the mediatisation of information across regions. Photography (1839): Louis Daguerre and William Henry Fox Talbot invented photography, which added a visual dimension to news reporting. Phonograph (1877): Thomas Edison's phonograph invention introduced the capability to record and reproduce sound, a significant development in the mediatisation of music and oral communication. Radio (1890s-1920s): Guglielmo Marconi's work on wireless telegraphy and subsequent developments by others led to the invention of radio. The introduction of radio revolutionised music accessibility, news, and cultural dissemination. Television (1920s-1930s): Television technology evolved from mechanical systems to electronic broadcasting. It transformed entertainment, influenced public opinion, and introduced visual storytelling. Internet (1960s-1980s): The development of the ARPANET in the 1960s laid the foundation for the modern Internet, which, over subsequent decades, revolutionised communication, information dissemination, and how people access and share media content. World Wide Web (1990s): The creation of the World Wide Web by Tim Berners- Lee in the early 1990s significantly impacted how information was shared, leading to the rise of online media, global connectivity, democratisation of information and 32 digital culture.

Mobile Phones (1980s-1990s): The proliferation of mobile phones in the late 20th Mediatisation century and their subsequent evolution into smartphones transformed communication. Mobile devices became a primary platform for accessing digital media content. It Increased accessibility, changed social dynamics, and transformed personal relationships. Social Media (2000s): The emergence of social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram revolutionised online interaction. These platforms enabled user-generated content, real-time sharing, and the rapid dissemination of information, contributing to the mediatisation of social life. It altered communication patterns, facilitated global connections, and transformed activism and social movements. Streaming Services (2000s-2010s): The rise of streaming services in the 21st century, such as Netflix and YouTube, disrupted traditional media consumption patterns. On-demand access to video content transformed the entertainment industry and altered viewing habits globally. The historical timeline that each technological advancement has contributed to the expansion of media's influence on communication, culture, and society.
2.2.2 Difference Between Mediation And Mediatisation
There was much debate initially over terminology, exploring whether it should be termed mediatisation, mediasation, medicalisation, or mediation. Many scholars preferred and used "mediation", like how "mediatisation" is used now. Both terms were used interchangeably. However, clarity emerged over time; now, each term has separate and distinct meanings. Mediatisation gained prominence in political research in the late 1990s when John
B. Thompson introduced the idea of the "mediatisation of culture." Swedish
professor Kent Asp was the first to develop the concept of mediatisation as a coherent theory and used it to study "the mediatisation of politics." Since then, European academics, particularly in Germany, Great Britain, Norway, and Denmark, have been actively engaged in conceptual, theoretical, and empirical research on mediatisation. Mediation refers to conveying, transmitting, or interpreting information or messages between sender and receiver. It involves the presence of an intermediary or mediator or a medium which facilitates communication. On the other hand, mediatisation is a more long-lasting process of changing social and cultural institutions due to increased media influence. The term is used to characterise changes in social, cultural, and political practices, cultures, and institutions in media-saturated societies, thus denoting transformations of these societies themselves. Agha defines mediation as the essential concept in social life whenever individuals are connected through speech or signs in communication. It involves material vehicles like telephone lines, email or video conferencing facilitating communication, and mediatisation encompasses long-term structural transformations resulting from ongoing mediated communication. It goes beyond individual acts of mediation and leads to sociocultural changes. Mediatisation involves processes like "remediation," where each act of mediation builds upon others. There are two types of mediation.

Communication Patterns Direct Mediatisation involves transforming non-mediated activities into mediated
of Digital Media
forms. For example, it involves transitioning games like physical chess boards and ludo to online chess and ludo games or online banking. Indirect Mediatisation: It influences activities through mediagenic symbols or mechanisms. An example is the merchandising industry around pizza and burger restaurants in a shopping mall, where the experience includes exposure to mediagenic symbols like cartoon mascots and cosplayers like Wonder Woman (DC Comics universe) and supervillain Loki (Marvel Comics universe). This has a direct influence on the sale of toys. Game on with the legends: Cosplayers in a mall in Chennai source New Indian Express Jan 24, 2024 Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Keep a media consumption diary for a week, reflecting on how different forms
of media impact your daily life and decisions. List at least any five activities.

2.2.3 Media Logic
Understanding media logic is crucial when examining the process of mediatisation. But before understanding media logic, we should first see media from the perspective of an institution. Media as Independent Institution: "Mediatisation implies that media not only play a role in their own determination but have become independent institutions. They intervene in and influence the activities of other institutions while providing shared communication fora for society. This evolution from being instruments to independent entities involves changes in rules, resource allocations, and the professionalisation of media practices" (Hjarvard,
2008) .
Historical Transformation of Media Institutions: 1920s-1980s: Media was an instrument in the hands of other institutions like science,

politics, religion, and commerce. It primarily served the specific interests of the Mediatisation institutions, e.g., the political party press, and was an instrument rather than an independent entity. 1980s-Present: Structural changes, deregulation, and technological advancements led to a more commercial and competitive media climate. Media evolved from cultural institutions to more market-oriented entities, focusing on audience preferences. Media has become increasingly intertwined with various aspects of society and plays a significant role in shaping public discourse, influencing cultural norms, and impacting how individuals perceive and interpret information. It has a logic that other social institutions must accommodate to get a larger audience as more and more of their activities are performed through the media. Now, actors of other institutions like politicians, opinion makers, corporate honchos, civil society leaders, and others have no choice but to adapt their communication methods to a form that suits the logic and preferences of the media to exist in business. However, the extent to which media logic helps and affects these institutions depends on the mutual interaction of the institutions and society. Altheide and Snow contributed a lot to the Media Logic Theory. According to them, "Media Logic" refers to the distinctive ways in which media organisations and their content shape the presentation of information and influence the thinking and behaviour of individuals and society. The modus operandi of media logic plays out at three levels: the institutional, technological, and content presentation levels. Let us discuss the key aspects of media logic: Simplification and Dramatisation involve condensing information and framing stories to capture attention. Personalisation: By focusing on individuals or specific cases, media can make information more relatable and emotionally compelling for audiences. Visual Orientation: Media logic prioritises images, videos, and graphics to convey information. Fragmentation: In the era of 24-hour news cycles, media logic prefers fragmentation of information. News stories are often presented in shorter, easily digestible segments and lack depth. Speed and Immediacy: The demand for breaking news and real-time updates is a key aspect of media logic. Prioritising getting information out quickly sometimes leads to misinformation. Entertainment Value: Media logic recognises the entertainment value of content. Stories have to be engaging and entertaining to retain the audience's attention. Interactivity: Social media platforms, for example, allow users to engage with and contribute to content, blurring the lines between media producers and consumers. Commercial interests often drive media logic. The need to attract advertisers and maintain profitability can influence the selection and presentation of content, leading to a focus on content that is likely to generate higher TRPs/ratings or clicks.

Communication Patterns Check Your Progress: 2
of Digital Media
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What media logic will you follow while writing a news story for TV
opposing a policymaker's decision on clearing of wastelands for development work?

2.3 DEFINITIONS OF MEDIATISATION
This section provides an overview of the diverse definitions of mediatisation proposed by various authors and scholars in communication, sociology, and cultural studies. Most definitions acknowledge the significance of dimensions like Time, Technology, and Theory. While not all definitions can be easily categorised within one of these three perspectives, most can be associated with either, with the primary dimension appearing to be the most decisive.
2.3.1 Definitions Based On Time
Mediatisation is a complex and multifaceted concept, and various scholars have emphasised its temporal dimension. Friedrich Krotz, a German communication scholar, has contributed significantly to mediatisation. He emphasises the temporal aspect by conceptualising mediatisation as a long-term process. According to Krotz, mediatisation involves reorganising social and cultural practices over extended periods, gradually integrating media into various aspects of society. Krotz's approach highlights the historical and evolving nature of mediatisation. Stig Hjarvard, a Danish media scholar, has also explored mediatisation with a focus on time. He suggests that mediatisation is a historical process characterised by a long-term transformation in which media become more influential and intertwined with different social spheres. Hjarvard's perspective underscores the idea that mediatisation is not an instantaneous occurrence but a gradual development that unfolds over time. Norwegian media scholar Knut Lundby has contributed to the development of mediatisation theory. His approach acknowledges the temporal dimension by examining the historical trajectory of media influence. Lundbysuggests that mediatisation involves a long-term restructuring of communication patterns and practices, emphasising the evolutionary nature of media's impact on society. All these scholars stress that mediatisation is a dynamic and historical process involving 36 media integration and societal transformation over extended periods.

2.3.2 Definitions Based On Technology Mediatisation
While prioritising technology in the definitions of mediatisation may not be as common as emphasising other dimensions, some scholars have highlighted the role of technology in shaping the concept. They believe mediatisation primarily develops in modern, industrialised, and western societies. Globalisation and mediatisation are interconnected, relying on the technical means provided by media, and further propelling the process of mediatisation in new contexts. Andreas Hepp, a German communication scholar, emphasised technology's central role. He argues that mediatisation is closely tied to technological advancements and changes in media infrastructure. According to Hepp, the transformation of communication practices is intricately linked to developing and deploying new media technologies. Stig Hjarvard, in addition to his emphasis on time, as mentioned earlier, also acknowledges the significance of technology in mediatisation. He suggests that the process involves the historical evolution of media influence and the technological changes that enable and shape these transformations. Hjarvard's perspective underscores the interplay between technology and the mediatisation process. It's important to note that while these scholars prioritise the technology dimension in their discussions of mediatisation, they also recognise technology's interconnected nature with other dimensions, such as time and theory.
2.3.3 Definitions Based On Theory
Definitions of mediatisation, primarily within the theoretical dimension, suggest that mediatisation research is currently more focused on theoretical foundations than empirical applications. This inclination applies to definitions based on Time and Technology as well. Many scholars focusing on theory also present studies of mediatisation in various domains such as politics, state strategies, public bureaucracy, corporations, law, sports, and popular culture to show concrete evidence. Most of these definitions have a theoretical foundation that considers "media logic" as a driving force in mediatisation. For instance, Stromback and Esser, European scholars, concentrate on the mediatisation of politics, defining it as a long-term process where the media's importance and spill-over effects on political processes increase. They emphasise the dynamic relationship between "political logic" and "media logic." Hjarvard, too, understands "media logic" as the "modus operandi" in mediatisation processes, Nick Couldry, a British sociologist, works incorporates critical theoretical perspectives on power dynamics, social structures, and the implications of mediatisation on democracy. Some authors used cultural domains and referred to concepts like "logic of practice" (from Bourdieu's sociology). Others, like Kunelius and Couldry, canter their theoretical approaches on social interaction, communication practices, and symbolic interaction, emphasising the interrelation between changes in media, communication, culture, and society. While there may not be a single universally agreed-upon definition of mediatisation, scholars often incorporate theoretical perspectives into their discussions.

2.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF MEDIATISATION
of Digital Media
Let us discuss the key characteristics of mediatisation: The pervasiveness of Media Influence: Media, accessible from virtually anywhere, shapes news, entertainment, and social interactions. Integration into Everyday Life: Media seamlessly blends into daily life, blurring public and private boundaries. The interconnectedness of Media and Social Institutions: Media is intrinsic to institutions like education, politics, religion, and the economy, influencing public opinion and discourse. Shaping Cultural Practices and Norms: Media constructs cultural practices, values, and norms, forming shared meanings and influencing understanding. Identity Construction: Media significantly shapes individual and collective identities, impacting perceptions of gender, race, and sexuality.
Mediatisation of Social Interaction: Platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and
Twitter centralise communication, information sharing, and opinion formation. Media Influence on Public Opinion: Media coverage sways public opinion, impacting perceptions of people, issues, or products. Technological Determinism: Mediatisation considers the impact of media technologies, such as digital media and AI, on social and cultural change. Media Logic: The concept involves distinctive characteristics of media systems, shaping information presentation, consumption, and dynamics. Temporal and Spatial Changes: Mediatisation explores how media alters perceptions of time and space, affecting information dissemination and breaking geographical barriers. Globalisation of Media: Mediatisation acknowledges the global dissemination of information, transcending national and cultural boundaries. Commercial Interest: Mediatisation influences advertising, journalism, and entertainment, disrupting traditional models with platforms like YouTube and Free ad-supported streaming TV (FAST).
2.5 MODES OF MEDIATISATION
Modes of Mediatisation encompass different ways in which media integration occurs. Key modes include: Technological Mediatisation: Examines the impact of tech advancements on media, transforming information consumption. Examples: TikTok, Video on Demand (VOD), OTT Platforms. Cultural Mediatisation: Explores how media shapes cultural practices, identities, and narratives.

Political Mediatisation: Focuses on the media's role in political processes, Mediatisation communication, and opinion formation. Examples: Election campaigns and political movements to make separate states like Telangana, Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh. Economic Mediatisation: Studies media's economic impact on markets, advertising, and business models. Examples: Online advertising and e-commerce platforms like OLX. Social Mediatisation explores the media's influence on social interactions, relationships, and community dynamics. Examples include social media activism and public movements. Institutional Mediatisation examines media integration into institutions like education and healthcare. An example is the use of online platforms for education. Temporal Mediatisation: Explores media's influence on temporal structures, providing real-time access to news and information. These modes are interconnected, offering a multifaceted understanding of how media permeates contemporary life.
2.5.1 Digitisation
Digitisation profoundly impacts mediatisation, transforming media consumption, production, and distribution: Increased Access: Online streaming and digital news platforms provide instant global access to diverse content. Convergence of Media Platforms: Digitization merges text, audio, and video into a single digital format, enabling multimedia storytelling. User-Generated Content: Platforms like YouTube and TikTok empower users to create and share content, influencing trends. Personalisation and Targeting: Digital tech enable personalised content delivery based on user preferences, as seen in streaming service algorithms. Interactivity and Engagement: Digitisation fosters interactive experiences through comments, likes, and social media interactions during live events. Data Analytics: Digital platforms leverage data analytics for insights into audience preferences, trends, and consumption patterns. Shift in Advertising Models: Digitisation transforms advertising with targeted ads and sponsored content online. Challenges to Traditional Media: Digitisation challenges traditional media outlets, impacting revenue models and distribution channels. Real-Time Communication: Digitisation facilitates instant communication and real- time news updates. Global Connectivity: Digitisation enhances global connectivity, fostering cultural exchange on a global scale.

Communication Patterns In summary, digitisation accelerates and amplifies the Mediatization process.
of Digital Media
Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Briefly discuss the impact of OTT platforms on young children's behaviour.
List any four positive or negative impacts.

2.5.2 Networked 'SCOPIC' Media
Digitisation enables networked 'scopic' media, a visualised network for simultaneous meaning-making and interpretation. This reflexive mechanism collects and focuses activities on a single surface, reducing the centrality of face-to-face interactions. Scopic is derived from the Greek term "scope," meaning "to see. Scopic media refers to mechanisms of observation and projection. It is a great boon for complex work at large networks. It creates synthetic situations where everyday activities migrate to the Internet, reducing the centrality of face-to-face interactions. Characteristics of Scopic Media: Synthetic Situations: Transforms face-to-face situations without physical presence. Visualisation of Remote Events: Presents content sequentially, streaming remotely. Shifting and Narrowing Physical Boundaries: Creates parallel realities. Expansion of Agency through Algorithms. Benefits: New global coordination for massive work. Enhances trust through transparency, making information visible globally. Example: In share market offices, networked 'scopic' media streamlines coordination, communication, and decision-making. Large screens, Bloomberg Terminals, and Video Walls present real-time data, enhancing efficiency. Interactive technologies and algorithms offer a visually immersive environment, enabling traders to observe, analyse, and coordinate in real time.
2.6 IMPACT OF MEDIATISATION
Mediatisation Impact:
Increased Social Media Influence
Expansion of Digital Storefronts

Influence on Public Opinion and Trends: Social media shapes fashion Mediatisation and political decisions. Transformation of News Consumption: 24/7 news cycles on online platforms influence public perception. Advertising and Consumer Choices: Media shapes consumer culture, promoting products and influencing purchases. Evolution of Political Communication: More options and ease in reaching the public. Boom in the Entertainment Industry: Mobile phones bring entertainment to our fingertips. Enhancement of Educational Tools: E-learning platforms and apps have become integral to modern education. Versatile Workplace Communication: Digital tools revolutionise remote collaboration, virtual meetings, and instant messaging. Amplification of Celebrity Culture: Media turns individuals into global icons, influencing trends and causes. Role in Crises and Social Movements: Real-time reporting mobilises support during crises and protests. Personal Branding through Media Platforms: Individuals showcase expertise and experiences on various platforms.
2.7 MEDIATISED AREAS
2.7.1 Society
Media profoundly impacts society, altering how individuals and communities perceive and engage with the world. It creates loose couplings in social spaces and destabilised local, national, and global links. Media-mediated interactions reshape communication dynamics and social norms. One such norm is the open posting of ridicule and gossip on social platforms. It de-links traditional face-to-face norms and establishes a virtual 'stage' for interaction. This mediatisation extends to cultural transmission globally, an impact seen in the worldwide reach of Shah Rukh's films and global music and fashion influences. Social media and dating apps further contribute to the mediatisation of society, shaping romantic expectations. Examples of mediatisation include social movements like the Arab Spring and the Black Lives Matter movement, crisis communication during emergencies like Covid 19, and the influence of celebrity influencers.
2.7.2 Politics
Political campaigns during elections are a great example of mediatisation in politics. Political campaigns increasingly rely on media platforms to reach voters. Social media, televised debates, and online advertising have become central to political communication. Political leaders also use media and social media platforms to influence public discourse and transform public opinion. Agnipath Scheme 2022, for recruiting

Communication Patterns soldiers below the rank of commissioned officers into the three services of the Indian
of Digital Media
armed forces and 'One Nation, One Election' to synchronise elections for the Lok Sabha and all state assemblies, are examples of such political rhetoric. Even all social revolution and independence movements have political communication driven by mediatisation.
2.7.3 Law and Public Policy
Mediatisation significantly impacts law and policymaking, shaping public awareness and advocacy through coverage of issues like the Narmada Bachao Andolan and the Use of CNG in Delhi. Media influences policy agenda setting with examples such as the Jan Lokpal Bill and Black Lives Matter movements. Legal cases like the Nirbhaya rape case see media pressure leading to reforms in the Juvenile Justice Act. Media campaigns on gun control affect public opinion and lawmakers' decisions. Global issues, such as the Rohingya crisis, gain attention through the media, leading to international pressure for legal action. Like Edward Snowden's NSA disclosures, whistleblower revelations drive public debates and calls for legal reforms. Media trials, as seen in the Sushant Singh Rajput case, are criticised for sensationalism and interference in investigations. Through movements like #MeToo and #ClimateStrike, social media raises awareness about legal issues and contributes to policy discussions. These examples illustrate how mediatisation shapes the legal landscape, influencing public perceptions, legal proceedings, and ethical considerations. The intersection of media and the legal system brings both positive and challenging consequences for the administration of justice.
2.7.4 Culture
Mediatisation profoundly shapes culture, influencing perception, creation, and engagement. Key aspects include cultural exchange through films, music, and literature, fostering cross-cultural understanding. Mediatisation contributes to cultural homogenisation, exemplified by the global influence of western fashion and lifestyle portrayed in digital forms. Cultural appropriation and fusion emerge through the exchange of cultural elements, as seen in fusion cuisine. The globalisation of pop culture is evident in the global popularity of Hollywood films and Bollywood music. Mediatisation impacts language, communication, and social media-driven cultural movements. Digital storytelling on media platforms transforms narrative structures, while virtual experiences enable the exploration of cultural events and heritage. Challenges arise from media reinforcing stereotypes, as seen in representations of ethnic or cultural groups and issues like racism. Mediatisation dynamically influences culture, fostering positive exchange and presenting challenges in representation, appropriation, and identity. The examples illustrate the intricate relationship between media and culture in today's globalised world.
2.7.5 Science
Mediatisation significantly impacts science, influencing how information is disseminated, 42 scientists communicate, and the public engages with discoveries.

Public Communication by Scientists: Scientists interact with the media to share Mediatisation research and foster public understanding. For example, the media coverage of the Higgs boson discovery at CERN. Science Journalism: Popular science magazines and newspaper sections offer understandable explanations of scientific studies relevant to the public. Citizen Science Engagement: Mediatization supports citizen science projects, such as those on Zooniverse, enabling global contributions to astronomy, biology, and environmental research. Scientific Outreach via social media: Scientists use social platforms for direct public engagement, democratising access to scientific information and building online communities. Impact on Funding and Research Priorities: Media campaigns promoting the urgency of climate change influence public perception, leading to increased funding, and shaping policy agendas. Ethical Debates and Controversies: Media coverage amplifies debates on the ethical implications of scientific advancements, influencing public opinion and policy considerations. Example: CRISPR-Case discussions on gene-editing technologies. Scientific Misinformation Challenges: Mediatisation brings challenges, including the spread of misinformation on topics like vaccines and climate change, requiring active correction by scientists. Collaboration and Interdisciplinary Research: Media attention to topics like AI and space exploration fosters collaborations between scientists, engineers, ethicists, and policymakers. These examples showcase the diverse impact of mediatisation on science, influencing communication, engagement, research, and ethical considerations.
2.7.6 Religion
Mediatisation significantly shapes religion, impacting how practices, beliefs, and institutions are communicated globally. Examples include: Global Dissemination: Mega-churches and leaders use TV, radio, podcasts, and online platforms to broadcast globally, broadening the reach of religious teachings. Online Religious Communities: Social media platforms enable online religious communities, fostering connections, sharing experiences, and facilitating discussions. Religious Education Online: Mediatisation influences religious education through online resources, providing access to texts, study guides, and educational materials for believers to engage with their traditions. Representation in Media: Mediatisation shapes religious representation in mainstream media, influencing public perceptions. An example is Ram Mandir's inauguration in Ayodhya. Digital Worship: Digital technology allows virtual religious services, enabling remote participation, especially during crises like the COVID-19 pandemic. Online Discourse: Online platforms facilitate religious discourse, allowing believers and non-believers

Communication Patterns to converse about beliefs, practices, and ethical considerations. Religious Marketing:
of Digital Media
Religious movements use professional websites, logos, and videos for branding, appealing to potential believers with contemporary practices.
2.7.7 Education
Mediatisation in education, marked by online platforms and digital tools, enhances accessibility but poses challenges. Real-life examples include: MOOCs and Online Learning Platforms: Coursera, edX, and Khan Academy offer global access to top-quality courses.
Digital Classrooms and E-Learning Systems: Learning Management Systems
like Canvas transform traditional classrooms, enabling the digital sharing of materials and discussions. Educational Podcasts and Webinars: TED-Ed and webinars provide insights, discussions, and strategies for various subjects. AR and VR in Education: Mediatization introduces immersive experiences through AR and VR technologies, enhancing learning with simulations and virtual field trips. Educational Apps and Games: Duolingo for language learning and Minecraft: Education Edition offer interactive virtual learning environments. Flipped Classrooms and Video Lectures: Mediatisation leads to flipped classrooms, where students review online content before class. Video lectures and multimedia enhance pre-learning resources. OER and Digital Textbooks: OpenStax and NCERT free ebooks provide accessible, peer-reviewed textbooks, reducing students' financial burdens. Social Media in Education: Platforms like Twitter and Facebook groups connect educators, allowing them to share articles and discuss topics. While offering opportunities, mediatisation in education brings challenges, including digital literacy, privacy concerns, and the need for effective pedagogical strategies.
2.7.8 Popular Culture and Art
Mediatisation profoundly impacts popular culture and art, shaping their creation, distribution, and consumption. Key points include: Globalisation and Cross-Cultural Exchange: Mediatization enables global cultural influences, fostering cross-cultural fertilisation and the emergence of hybrid expressions in art. Influence on Artistic Expression: Artists, aware of their role in a mediatic system, use various forms (painting, sculpture, digital art), considering how medium choice contributes to the message. A contemporary artist reflecting on digital media through their work is an example. Integration of Technology: Artists incorporate digital technologies, giving rise to new forms of expression like media art, interactive installations, and digital storytelling. Example: Evolution of live and mediated musical performances challenging traditional 44 authenticity perceptions.

Digital platforms revolutionise popular culture and art distribution, enhancing global Mediatisation accessibility. Mediatisation involves commercialisation, impacting artistic processes. Media representation of popular culture influences societal norms. Social media provides immediate feedback, impacting artists' development and fostering a dynamic creative process.
2.7.9 Sports
Video Gaming Culture and Esports: Mediatization has transformed gaming from a niche subculture to a global phenomenon, with professional gamers becoming celebrities. This has influenced social perceptions of gaming and contributed to its acceptance as a legitimate form of entertainment. The growth of esports (competitive video gaming) has turned gaming into a mainstream form of entertainment. Tournaments are broadcast on platforms like Twitch, attracting large audiences.
2.7.10 Commerce/ Corporate:
Media can make or break the reputation of an organisation. Embracing digital channels, social media, and data-driven strategies has become essential for businesses to stay competitive, connect with their audience, and adapt to the evolving landscape of the mediatised business environment. Consumer Behaviour and Advertising: The mediatisation of Advertising and Public Relations profoundly affects consumer behaviour and the company's growth. Advertisements on various media platforms, including television, social media, and online content, can shape preferences, influence purchasing decisions, and contribute to the creation of consumer culture. Public relations can even save a company from crisis. Toyota Recall Crisis (2009-2010), Samsung Galaxy Note 7 Recall (2016). In both cases, the company communicated openly about the issue, apologised to consumers, implemented new safety measures in their product development and recalled their product. This transparent communication strategy helped the company mitigate long-term damage to Web Presence and Branding: A strong online presence, including a well-designed website, contributes to a company's branding efforts. Businesses invest in creating visually appealing and user-friendly websites to showcase products, services, and brand identity. Digital Storefronts: The rise of e-commerce platforms and online marketplaces has transformed how businesses sell products and services. Companies establish digital storefronts, which reach global audiences and enable transactions 24/7. Brand Promotion: Social media platforms have become powerful tools for promoting brands, engaging customers, and managing reputations. Content Marketing and Information Dissemination: Businesses use content marketing to provide valuable information, establish expertise, and attract potential customers. Blogs, articles, videos, and other forms of content engage and educate the audience.

Communication Patterns Data-Driven Decision-Making: Businesses use data analytics to gather insights
of Digital Media
into consumer behaviour, preferences, and market trends. This information guides strategic decision-making in product development, marketing strategies, and customer relationship management.
Online Customer Service, Influencer Marketing, Online Reviews and
Reputation Management, E-commerce and Digital Transactions through
Digital Payment Systems are other examples of mediatisation in the commerce sector.
2.8 ADVANTAGES OF MEDIATISATION
In today's digital landscape, the ease of access to diverse information across the globe has transformed the way we perceive and interact with the world. This accessibility has facilitated rapid dissemination of ideas and knowledge, fostering global communication and collaboration. Moreover, it has opened unprecedented educational opportunities, granting individuals enhanced access to digital learning resources and enabling lifelong learning. Alongside educational benefits, the digital realm has played a pivotal role in shaping political awareness and participation, empowering citizens with informed engagement and facilitating civic involvement. Furthermore, the proliferation of digital platforms has provided a vast array of entertainment options, catering to diverse tastes and cultures, while also optimizing social interaction by streamlining connections and communication channels. Simultaneously, the digital sphere has catalysed economic growth through the expansion of digital economies, nurturing e-commerce platforms and fostering global collaborations. Social networking platforms have strengthened social ties and facilitated the formation of online communities, while also enabling rapid crisis management through the quick dissemination of information during emergencies. The democratization of media through citizen journalism has empowered individuals to actively participate in shaping public discourse, contributing diverse perspectives, and fostering innovation. Moreover, the continuous evolution of new media technologies has spurred cultural exchange, production, and creativity on a global scale, serving as a platform for the expression and celebration of diverse cultural identities. Additionally, the ability for individuals to exert control over the flow of information in media interactions has emerged as a critical aspect, emphasizing the importance of understanding and navigating digital spaces responsibly. While acknowledging these advantages, addressing associated drawbacks is crucial for responsible and beneficial mediatisation.
2.9 DISADVANTAGES OF MEDIATISATION
Loss of Privacy: Constant media presence, especially on social platforms, exposes personal information without explicit consent. Erosion of Critical Thinking: Exposure to biased or sensationalised content may diminish critical thinking skills, fostering acceptance without scrutiny. Erosion of Critical Thinking: Exposure to biased or sensationalised content may diminish critical thinking skills, fostering acceptance without scrutiny.

Social Isolation: While enabling global connections, excessive digital reliance can lead to social isolation, which can impact mental health. Media Manipulation: Mediatisation can be accompanied by manipulative narratives controlled by entities for their interests. Normalisation of Superficial Values: Media emphasis on superficial values normalises certain standards, impacting societal pressures and individual well-being. Reduced Face-to-Face Interaction: Excessive digital communication reduces face- to-face interactions, potentially affecting social skills and relationship depth. Recognising these drawbacks is essential for addressing challenges and mitigating negative impacts while maximising positive contributions. Understanding these disadvantages is crucial for individuals, policymakers, and society to address the challenges of mediatisation and mitigate its negative effects while maximising its positive contributions.
2.10 ISSUES OF CONTENTION
While mediatisation can bring about positive changes, it also raises several issues of contention. As per Brown, mediatisation collapses ontological divisions, blurring distinctions between fact and fiction, nature, and culture, global and local. Baudrillard says that media create simulacra, representations of reality that seem more real than physical and social reality, thus creating confusion and hyperreality. So, mediatisation brings concerns, too: Privacy and Cybersecurity: Increased digital footprint raises identity theft and hacking concerns, demanding a focus on cybersecurity and ethical tech use. Commercialisation of News: Reliance on advertising revenue may prioritise sensational content over substantive news, impacting journalistic quality. Media Literacy Challenge: Manipulation, biased reporting, and filter bubbles challenge media literacy, impacting democratic processes and fostering polarisation. Disinformation and Fake News: Digital platforms facilitate the rapid spread of false narratives, making it difficult to distinguish reliable sources. Hyperconnectivity and Information Overload: Constant information flow can lead to confusion, anxiety, and a lack of critical thinking. Cultural Homogenization: Global media dominance may overshadow local cultures, impacting diversity and identity. Digital Divide: Unequal access to media and technology contributes to social disparities and limits opportunities. Ethical Challenges: Mediatisation raises ethical questions about technology use, privacy, and the media's role in shaping public discourse. Balancing benefits with ethical safeguards requires a comprehensive approach involving media literacy, regulation, and ongoing public discourse.

Communication Patterns Check Your Progress: 4
of Digital Media
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Host a discussion forum in the family or class to explore how mediatisation
has influenced local culture, traditions, or social dynamics.

2. Analyse a case study of a specific event, news story or phenomenon and identify
how mediatisation shaped public perception.

2.11 GLOBAL CHANGES AND ONGOING
TRANSFORMATIONS
Mediatisation has brought about many global changes and ongoing transformations across society. Tomlinson discusses how media, particularly the Internet and satellite TV, have contributed to globalisation by de-territorialisation cultural experiences and social interactions. Media products and communication flow across national boundaries, creating a globalised context. Though most of these trends and changes have been discussed in this chapter under various sub-topics, so we are just reiterating their headings to put them under one umbrella category of global changes:
Information Access and Dissemination
Communication and Connectivity
Cultural Influence and Globalisation
Political Engagement and Activism
Economic Shifts and E-Commerce
Education and E-Learning
Media Consumption Habits
Employment Landscape
Change in Media Industry Dynamics with Digital Disruption. Transformation in Social Dynamics and Online Communities. These ongoing trends and transformations highlight the complex interplay between mediatisation and various aspects of global society. They influence how individuals, communities, and institutions interact and evolve in the digital age, underscoring the importance of addressing emerging challenges and ensuring responsible and ethical use of media technologies.

2.12 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed media integration into society, known as mediatisation. It has brought about a complex interplay of advantages and disadvantages in contemporary life. On the one hand, it has facilitated widespread information access, global communication, and educational opportunities, contributing to economic growth and fostering cultural exchange. On the other hand, it posed challenges as well. Privacy and cybersecurity concerns have grown with increased digital presence. Commercialisation of news and sensationalism may compromise journalistic quality, while media literacy challenges impact democratic processes. Disinformation, fake news, and the potential for information overload threaten critical thinking. Cultural homogenisation, the digital divide, and ethical dilemmas regarding technology use further underscore the need for a balanced approach. To navigate these challenges, society must prioritise media literacy, enact regulatory measures, and engage in ongoing public discourse. This balanced approach aims to harness the positive aspects of mediatisation while mitigating its potential negative consequences, fostering a responsible and beneficial integration of media into the fabric of modern life.
2.13 KEYWORDS
Institutions : Domain or field of social life governed by a particular set of formal or informal rules, displays a particular structure, serves certain social functions, and allocates resources for various actions in various ways. Example: Family, work, political system, religion, sports, business, and Media; Hjarvard, 2014 Mediapolis : Mediapolis is a term that combines the word "media" with the various meanings of "polis" (city, state, citizens). It's a way of interweaving media, politics, and cities. Artificial intelligence : Is the intelligence of machines or software. It is a broad term for techniques that enable machines to
(AI)
mimic or exceed human intelligence. It involves studying the patterns of the human brain and analysing the cognitive process. Media Convergence : Exemplifies the integration of various media forms, such as text, audio, and video, into digital platforms. For instance, online news articles often include multimedia elements like images, videos, and interactive graphics. Misinformation : False information that is spread, regardless of whether there is intent to mislead. Disinformation : Deliberately misleading or biased information; manipulated narrative or facts; propaganda. 49

2.14 FURTHER READINGS
of Digital Media
1. Agha, A. (2011). "Mediating Orders and Borders."
2. Altheide, D. L., & Snow, R. P. (1979). Media logic. Sage Publications.
3. Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things with Words.
4. Bergmann, J. R. (1993). Discreet Indiscretions: The Social Organization of Gossip
5. Billig, M. (2005). Laughter and Ridicule: Towards a Social Critique of Humour.
6. Deuze, M. (2011). Media life. Media, Culture & Society, 33(1), 137-148. https:/
/doi.org/10.1177/0163443710386518
7. Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.
8. Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of
Structuration.
9. Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life.
10. Hjarvard, Stig. (2008). The Mediatization of Society. Nordicom Review. 29.10.1515/nor-2017-0181.11. Livingstone, Sonia & Lunt, Peter. (2014). Mediatisation: An emerging paradigm
for media and communication research? 10.1515/9783110272215.703.12. Lundby, Knut. Mediatisation of Communication, Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter
Mouton, 2014. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110272215
13. Norman, D. A. (1990). The Design of Everyday Things.
14. Schultz, T. (2006). Interactive or Just Informed Public? A Conception of
Publicness in Online Services
15. Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language.
16. Silverstone, R. (2006). Media and Morality: On the Rise of the Mediapolis.
17. Thompson, J. B. (1995). Media and Modernity: A Social Theory of the Media.
18. Tuchman, G. (1972). Objectivity as Strategic Ritual: An Examination of
Newsmen's Notions of Objectivity.
2.15 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Checking news updates on my preferred news app. I noticed that the headlines
often set the tone for my mood and influence my initial thoughts for the day. Social Media Breaks During Work: I took short breaks to scroll through social media platforms. Initially intended for relaxation, these breaks are sometimes extended longer than planned. I realised that social media can significantly distract

me, impacting my productivity and focus. Online Shopping Influence: I observed Mediatisation that targeted advertisements influenced my purchasing decisions. Recommendations based on my browsing history and preferences led me to explore and buy items I might not have considered otherwise. I typically unwind by watching a TV show or streaming content. I noticed that the content I choose significantly affects my mood and relaxation level Late-Night Reading and Digital Books: The accessibility of a vast library at my fingertips has changed my reading habits. Check Your Progress: 2
1. It is crucial to follow media logic that aligns with the visual and auditory nature
of television broadcasting. Here are some considerations for creating a compelling and balanced TV news story:
1. Visual Storytelling
2. Interviews and Testimonials
3. Location Shots
4. Documentary-style Segment
5. B-Roll Footage
6. Graphics and Infographics
7. Community Impact
8. Experts in the Field
9. Legal and Regulatory Visuals
10. Timely Updates
11. Engaging Narration
Check Your Progress: 3
1. Positive Impacts:
1. Educational Content
2. Entertainment and Creativity
3. Diversity of Content
Negative Impacts:
1. Excessive Screen Time
2. health issues
3. Inappropriate Content Exposure
4. Impact on Social Interactions:
5. Indulging in Commercialisation and Advertising

Communication Patterns Check Your Progress: 4
of Digital Media
1. Possible points can be Changed in:
Media Consumption Patterns
Social Media and Community Interaction
Traditional Practices
Or
Impact on Language and Communication, Thinking patterns, and Cultural
Awareness about different countries.
2. Example: Mandal Commission: Defining creamy layer and its exclusion from
reservation.

UNIT 3 COMPUTER - MEDIATED
COMMUNICATION
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 Agency in Computer-mediated Communication
3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Computer-mediated Communication
3.4 Theories of Computer-Mediated Communication
3.4.1 Social Presence Theory
3.4.2 Media Richness Theory
3.4.3 Social Information Processing Theory
3.4.4 Hyperpersonal Model of Computer-Mediated Communication
3.5 Types of Computer-Mediated Communication
3.5.1 Synchronous Communication
3.5.2 Asynchronous Communication
3.6 Benefits of Synchronous Communication
3.7 Benefits of asynchronous Communication
3.8 Computer-Mediated Communication and Psychology
3.9 Computer-Mediated communication and its use in Mass communication
3.10 Let Us Sum Up
3.11 Keywords
3.12 Further Readings
3.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
Computer-mediated Communication (CMC) refers to communication in which users interact with each other with the help of computers and networks. CMC facilitates communication among people at different locations and in different time zones. Electronic mail, text messaging, chat rooms, video calls, and instant messaging are ways to practice CMC. Since CMC happens with the help of computers, Internet- enabled devices, networks, and the Internet, the chances of having noise are high. This is unlike the FtF situation; the users may also experience communication barriers. People lacking digital media literacy skills may struggle to experience CMC. Since it is a virtual mode of communication, users are anonymous, and self-disclosure may be delayed. The machine is an interface that facilitates communication. It sends the data from the sender to the receiver and back to the sender. In CMC, feedback may be instant or delayed. Delayed feedback indicates a lack of interest in conversation or the unavailability of the receiver. The message has to be encoded in a manner which can be decoded easily by the receiver and vice versa. People with common interests can come together and form virtual communities with the help of CMC.

Communication Patterns 3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
of Digital Media
After completing this Unit, you should be able to Understand the concept of Computer-mediated Communication; Learn the theories related to computer-mediated communication; Understand the types of computer-mediated communication and their advantages and disadvantages; and Learn the role of computer-mediated communication in mass communication.
3.2 AGENCY IN COMPUTER-MEDIATED
COMMUNICATION
Agency in computer-mediated Communication (CMC) refers to the ability of people to act, make selections, and exert their presence in the digital realm. CMC offers numerous modes of interaction through virtual environments like email, instant messaging, and social media. Here are some key points concerning agency in CMC:
1. Select the communication platforms:
Customers can choose the communication platform they want to use. The selection is governed by the sender and receiver's technical literacy levels. For example, they could opt for electronic mail for formal communication and informal conversations with family and friends, or they might choose Facebook and WhatsApp.
2. Content creation and dissemination: CMC offers the agency to users
to create content in the format of their choice and gives them the control to share it on social media and other platforms. The content may include texts, images, graphics videos and animation. This content allows users to share their thoughts, discuss, and interact on social networks.
3. Creating online identity:
CMC offers agency to users, who are free to create their own identities with the help of software tools. Moreover, they can share their online identity with their friends. In virtual chatrooms, users can choose any avatar of their choice. The avatar may indicate the user's persona; the avatar can wear sunglasses, jeans, and a t-shirt to look cool. He can look like a sports star and be dressed accordingly. Virtual gadgets and props can be added to copy any style and resemble a Hollywood actor. So, the user chooses how he would like to present himself on the Internet, his digital presence.
4. Social presence, interaction, and networking:
Internet users are free to select their friends and maintain relationships with them. They enjoy the agency where they decide their virtual presence's time, duration, and mode. Moreover, they can choose the social networks they want to participate in. Despite the mediated nature of communication, customers keep the agency in forming and keeping social relationships online. They could provoke conversations, be part of groups, set up connections, and construct networks based on shared interests and affiliations. The users

can choose the discussions they would participate in, where they would Computer-Mediated Communication like to give feedback and simply want to block unwanted communication.
5. Privacy and security:
Users can maintain their privacy while communicating through computers and digital devices. They also have the agency to adjust their security levels, allowing access to their files and folders on the machine. The privacy and security settings can also be adjusted through individual apps and browsers.
6. Digital media literacy:
Developing literacy skills helps users navigate the CMC environments successfully. Media literacy also empowers users to be responsible for their communication. Digital media literacy skills make users aware of misinformation and disinformation.
3.3 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
COMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATION
The advantages of computer-mediated communication are as follows:
1. CMC can happen anytime and anywhere. The sender and receiver can
be in different time zones. It offers flexibility in time and place. The technology used for communication is quite cheap, and the message can be sent almost anywhere in the world. The receiver should have Internet access and a device to receive the message. The message can be sent to one person at a time or many users with a single click. So, in that sense, CMC is a time-saving process. A lecturer can send a single mail to his entire cohort of 100 students. All can see and understand the same message, thus minimising the communication gap. This instant feedback is relevant and makes CMC a productive process.
2. Messages sent through CMC can be archived for later retrieval. Almost
all tools, such as WhatsApp, Telegram, Facebook, and email, offer server space where older messages are stored. The metadata of these messages is also stored, providing agency for faster retrieval.
3. CMC can be in the form of text, audio, and video. Users can choose
their mode and style of communication. Moreover, visually challenged people can communicate through audio and text, while people who are deaf and dumb can interact through sign language. These days, quite a few CMC tools support emojis and emoticons. The visual cues can be given with the help of emojis. Emojis are quite successful in conveying emotions and state of mind. If one is happy or sad, he can convey this with the help of emojis, built-in WhatsApp and email. The disadvantages of CMC are:
1. CMC lacks the cues given by FtF communication. The words and emojis
may help convey the message, but their impact may be much lesser than that of FtF communication. Communication is not only about text and words. CMC had no non-verbal cues, but the introduction of emojis changed things.

Communication Patterns These emojis and pictograms used on mobile apps have made CMC media-
of Digital Media
rich. Emojis and emoticons can be seen as non-verbal Communication in CMC, but this may also lead to misunderstanding. Young users use animated emojis quite frequently. Again, emojis are to be used with care in different cultures.
2. CMC suffers from a trust deficit, and people often feel that their confidential
data and privacy are compromised. Anonymity and delay in self-disclosure led to low trust, which improves with time and as the relationship moves from machine mediated to FtF.
3. For CMC, one needs a basic level of information technology skills. Issues
of Internet connectivity, cost of data plans, cost of software being used, and malware attacks often discourage the user from using CMC.
3.4 THEORIES OF COMPUTER-MEDIATED
COMMUNICATION
Some of the theories that explain computer-mediated communication are discussed below.
3.4.1 Social Presence Theory
Social presence theory in communication and psychology explores how users feel connected and socially present in computer-mediated communication environments, such as online discussions, chatrooms, virtual communities, zoom calls and instant messaging apps. John Short, Ederyn Williams, and Bruce Christie contributed towards this theory in 1976. It argues that the social cues given by the various communication mediums differ. This difference in the mediums affects the development of interpersonal relationships. Presence refers to the physical world and how it is understood in the virtual environment in CMC. For example, when a user wears a virtual reality headset in the metaverse, the virtual stimuli trigger his mind and body.? The user may feel the same connection with other users in the metaverse. People who spend more time in a virtual reality simulation perceive it to be like the real physical world and demonstrate physiological effects. Social presence is "the degree to which we perceive another person's digital presence, say an avatar, as a real person and interact with it as though there is an existing relationship. During CMC, different technologies and their agency offer varying perceptions from real to virtual. For example, while going through news on a mobile app, we do not forget that it's a mobile phone and are quite aware of the agency it offers. On the other hand, if one has an online meeting, the behaviour and communication are the same as in a FtF situation. The difference lies in the perception of social presence and the stimuli. Researchers use social presence theory to improvise the design of communication tools and make CMC more effective. According to the theory, social presence is influenced by factors like:
1. Sensory Richness: Communication channels that provide more sensory cues,
such as facial expressions and gestures, tone, and voice pitch, communicate a higher social presence. Video conferencing has a higher social presence

than text-based chat since participants can see and hear each other. Virtual Computer-Mediated Communication reality environments in the metaverse or augmented reality with some degree of immersiveness enhance social presence by creating a sense of co-presence in the shared space on the metaverse.
2. Degree of Interactivity: Interactivity in CMC depends on the device and
software used. More interactivity indicates a higher social presence. Higher levels of interactivity, like immediate feedback during real- time interpersonal communication, enhance the sense of social presence.
3. Personalisation of content: Social presence is felt more when the content
is personalised to suit the needs of the individuals. Tailored content increases the perception of social presence, and they get more involved in CMC, thereby showing a higher degree of interactivity.
3.4.2 Media Richness Theory
Richard L. Daft and Robert H. Lengel proposed this theory in the 1980s. It discusses how different communication media differ in their ability to convey information, which affects the understanding of the message and its context. The theory suggests that the richness of the information can be on a continuum, from low to high. Key components of Media Richness Theory include:
1. Richness: Media richness refers to how much a communication medium
can convey cues and immediate feedback. Rich media facilitates personalisation and conveys nuance, emotion, and context, leading to more effective and goal-oriented communication.
2. Rich Media: FtF Communication and video conferencing are examples
of rich media since the visual component provides multiple cues and faster personalisation.
3. Medium-Rich Media: Telephonic calls and audio conferences offer some
richness as they offer vocal cues and immediate feedback. However, the lack of visual cues makes them less reliable, so personalisation takes time. Text messages in WhatsApp lie on a lower continuum than articles published in a magazine, as the articles might have some photographs, i.e., visual cues. Text messages cannot convey emotions to the extent a photograph does.
4. Cues are signals or communication elements present during verbal and
nonverbal communication. They provide an additional context to the conversation, help in better comprehension, and thus facilitate faster feedback. Examples of cues include facial expressions, tone, gestures, and proxemics. Cues vary depending on the affordances of the device and software used for CMC. Thus, this theory postulates that media organisations should plan the richness they want in their messages to achieve the desired results. Rich media can accompany stories and beats, which are more difficult to comprehend, while low richness in media is used for basic stories, which are just informing the audience. For example, a weather report can have rich media like videos and animation, while a simple movie review can be based on text only and would be low rich.

Communication Patterns Check Your Progress: 1
of Digital Media
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of computer-mediated communication.

2. What is social presence theory? Discuss.

3. Explain the concept of media richness theory.

3.4.3 Social Information Processing Theory
Joseph Walther's social information processing theory looks at how people process information. This theory tries to understand how interpersonal relationships are developed through computer-mediated Communication (CMC). A relationship begins with verbal cues, but there are no non-verbal cues. So, the receiver and the sender form impressions based on the low-rich media, i.e., text messages. Social processing theory attempts to analyse this process. The theory also argues that the relationship formed through CMC becomes stronger over time and moves to an FtF relationship, indicating intimacy and closeness. The basic difference between CMC and FtF Communication is that there is an obligation to reply or give immediate feedback in face-to-face communication. In contrast, the receiver can delay the feedback in CMC, indicating his unavailability to continue the conversation. Moreover, FtF conversation has visual cues, whereas CMC may lack that; also, the interpretation of cues through CMC may be wrong.
3.4.4 Hyperpersonal Model of Computer-Mediated
Communication The Hyperpersonal Model of CMC postulates that under certain conditions, CMC has the agency to transcend traditional face-to-face (FtF) communication. This effect is advantageous for communicators. Communication professor Joseph Walther developed this theory in 1996. The key Components in the hyperpersonal model of computer-mediated communication are:
1) Sender's Selective Self-Presentation: In a CMC mode, the sender can
choose how he wants to be represented. He can decide his persona and appearance. What image would he like to create during virtual

communication? One can decide on the display picture (DP) of their Computer-Mediated Communication WhatsApp or Facebook profile and plan the status updates and photos the user would like to show others. Self-presentation and cues allow the users to portray their image in the way they like.
2) Receivers: The recipients also want to like the people they interact with.
Their impressions of the sender are formed by their portrayal of their image and the cues they give. Thus, the receivers often justify their reasons for liking the sender. They look for cues that strengthen their inclination towards the sender.
3) Channel: Senders can choose the channel to carefully construct their
message for self-presentation. They can plan the communication time and may synchronise it with the channel settings to deliver cues for image representation. Social media platforms, email, voice messages or video calls are a few channels that are used for self-presentation.
4) Feedback is the exchange of messages between sender and receiver. The
sender can practice self-disclosure while self-representation and build trust with the receiver, creating a Communication spiral.
3.5 TYPES OF COMPUTER-MEDIATED
COMMUNICATION
Instant messaging on mobile through WhatsApp, Google Chat, Skype, and conferencing are examples of synchronous computer-mediated communication. Sending text messages like SMS, MMS, email, discussion forums on various subjects, and mailing lists are examples of asynchronous computer-mediated communication.
3.5.1 Synchronous Communication
Computer-mediated communication has two types: synchronous and asynchronous. Computer-mediated communication that happens in real time is synchronous. The sender and receiver may be in different places, but with the help of a machine, they interact as though they are sharing the same physical space, just like FtF. Video chats, WhatsApp calls, and FaceTime audio calls are examples of synchronous communication.
3.5.2 Asynchronous Communication
On the other hand, in asynchronous computer-mediated communication, the communication is not real-time. There is delayed feedback. The visual cues may be less effective than those in real-time synchronous communication. Examples of asynchronous Communication include text messages and emails.
3.6 BENEFITS OF SYNCHRONOUS
COMMUNICATION
Synchronous communication facilitates feedback in real-time. Mobile devices, WhatsApp calls, Zoom video conferencing, and telephonic calls are examples of synchronous communication. Immediate feedback helps in quick decision-making. Business decisions can be taken immediately as team members discuss the insights

Communication Patterns over a video call. Tools like Zoom and Google Meet allow files to be shared, and
of Digital Media
the user can show the charts and findings through video conferencing. Synchronous communication helps build a rapport faster with other users, which helps form relationships faster. It is time-saving, and the cues help clarify sensitive issues. Faster and immediate feedback also helps in removing communication gaps.
3.7 BENEFITS OF ASYNCHRONOUS
COMMUNICATION
The receiver can respond when it's comfortable for him. In a team setting, the team gets enough time to plan their response. Asynchronous communication has delayed feedback, which means that users can continue to focus on their job and will not get distracted. They reply when they are prepared. Different team members can co-ordinate and work out a strategy before replying.
3.8 COMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATION
AND PSYCHOLOGY
CMC is very different from FtF communication. In audio and text-based CMC, one cannot see the physical and facial expressions of the person with whom one communicates. So, visual cues like gestures and body language are missing here. Psychologists have examined the processes that come into play while practising CMC. Deindividuation, coined by Festinger, Pepitone and Newcomb (1952), is the first such process which says that CMC leads to a decline in concerns about self- presentation, attention to social norms, and a focus on the self. Another psychological process in CMC is anonymity. Those engaging in CMC often practice lower self- regulation since they think they are not seen and can lie about their identity. Anonymity and deindividuation can have positive and negative consequences. CMC is quite impersonal because of the lack of physical space to be shared in real-time. Moreover, users are unaware of each other's location, gender, age, and background. They only see what the other person wants them to see, and based on that, they make their decisions about each other. So, there is always doubt and curiosity about knowing the other person. People often enjoy two or more identities online. They have different profiles, profile pictures and avatars on social media platforms and mobile apps. They might show a different aspect of their personality on these apps since some apps and platforms are designed for specific tasks. For example, on LinkedIn, one can show his academic and professional achievements to enjoy a good reputation, increasing his chances of getting a better job. On a gaming platform like Steam, people can upload different details about themselves and highlight their success stories from online gaming. It's quite easy to manipulate a person's identity on the Internet. Multiple identities can be used to commit crimes. So, in real life, a person can be the opposite of what he depicts about himself on the Internet.
3.9 COMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATION
AND ITS USE IN MASS COMMUNICATION
CMC is now being used for mass communication due to its convenience, operability, 60 accessibility, and ease of usage. A person must have basic literacy skills to operate

devices used in CMC. With the coming of Windows and mobile operating systems Computer-Mediated Communication in Hindi and other languages, it is easy for the common man to communicate. Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube are used extensively to share information on various topics. Information about every subject, news, topic, and issue is available on the web and is being shared and discussed with the help of social media. Not only news but also business reports, advertisements, annual reports, etc., are being shared with the help of CMC to reach out to its clients, customers, and other stakeholders. Social media also offers interaction and engagement, which allows users to give feedback. The feedback includes likes, shares, comments, and retweets. Computer-mediated communication allows news to be disseminated through websites and blogs. News websites have video stories that can be shared through instant messaging tools. CMC facilitates the spread of news and other media content to remote areas, provided there is high bandwidth to support media-rich files. Video streaming platforms like YouTube, Vimeo, and Dailymotion can also be used to communicate with and reach their audiences. This form of communication is one- many. This is the major advantage of computer-mediated communication. The message can be encoded and, with the help of technology, disseminated to many homogenous and heterogeneous audiences. As mentioned, the message can also be audio but lacks cues. Since these messages have been produced, they are generally free from any glitches, and the content has also been seen before publishing it on the web. Platforms like YouTube and Dailymotion allow audiences to share feedback and invite user reviews. This helps the producers improve their content for the next programme. Podcasts and images can also be used to communicate. Information on almost any topic can be published through CMC. Thus, CMC has the potential to connect individuals who are physically at different locations and may have different attitudes, beliefs, and cultures. CMC brings them together and facilitates information exchange among virtual communities. These communities are formed because they have similar interests and come together for a cause; once the purpose is fulfilled, the virtual communities start dispersing. This temporal phenomenon happens because of CMC, but the results may last longer. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of asynchronous communication.

2. What is social information processing theory? Discuss.

Communication Patterns 3. Explain the role of CMC in mass communication.
of Digital Media

3.10 LET US SUM UP
Computer-mediated communication has revolutionised the way people communicate and exchange data. It is a boon for all, as people in distant places can interact at their convenience. Verbal and non-verbal communication is also done through CMC. All one needs is an Internet-enabled device and an Internet connection. The initial cost of procuring the hardware and software and the Internet fees might deter a few, but if used properly, it can be a game changer. The cost of hardware and software is coming down, and the Internet plans are getting cheaper. CMC is useful for students and working and non-working professionals. It is extremely useful in e-commerce, e-governance, and online education. The use of CMC was witnessed during the pandemic as schools struggled to impart education. People were confined to homes but still could do their work, and the children could complete their education. CMC can be synchronous and asynchronous. Research scholars have suggested a few theories that explain the concept of CMC and the psychological journey of the individuals who experience CMC. CMC has fewer drawbacks as compared to its advantages. Finally, while communicating through machines in a mediated environment, one should be alert and safeguard one's data and identity.
3.11 KEYWORDS
Affordances : The product design to be used in a channel offers potential opportunities for usage. For example, a keyboard's curved shape allows the user to use it while relaxing on a sofa. Affordances allow things that can be done with the hardware. Agent : A computer program that acts on its own or behalf of a user, thereby giving an agency in the process. Avatar : A visual representation of a human user on the web. This can be any popular character from films, cartoons, superheroes, or the actual photograph of the user. Deindividuation is the process of losing awareness of oneself while experiencing CMC. Emojis are pictographic representations of faces that show different emotional states a human being expresses. They can be added to the text in an email or message to supplement text messages, improving understanding and resulting in faster feedback. An emoticon is the pictorial representation of facial expressions or actions generated by typing characters on a computer keyboards.

Computer-Mediated
3.12 FURTHER READINGS
Communication
1. Computer-Mediated Communication. (2022). United Kingdom: IntechOpen.
2. Kelsey, S., St. Amant, K. (2011). Computer-Mediated Communication: Issues
and Approaches in Education. Ukraine: Information Science Reference.
3. Thurlow, C., Lengel, L., Tomic, A. (2004). Computer-Mediated Communication.
India: SAGE Publications.
4. Yao, M. Z., & Ling, R. (2020). "What is computer-mediated communication?"
--An introduction to the special issue. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 25(1), 4-8. https://academic.oup.com/jcmc/article/ 25/1/4/5736586
3.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Computer-mediated communication offers convenience, global reach, and
asynchronous interaction. However, it lacks non-verbal cues, leading to misunderstandings, and may foster impersonal relationships due to reduced social cues and intimacy. Computer-mediated communication (CMC) offers several advantages, including increased accessibility and convenience. Through CMC, individuals can communicate instantaneously regardless of geographical barriers, fostering global connectivity. Moreover, CMC platforms often facilitate asynchronous communication, allowing users to interact at their convenience, enhancing flexibility. Additionally, CMC enables the sharing of diverse multimedia content, enriching communication experiences. However, CMC also presents some drawbacks. One major concern is the potential for misinterpretation due to the absence of nonverbal cues such as facial expressions and body language, leading to misunderstandings and conflicts. Furthermore, the impersonal nature of CMC may weaken interpersonal bonds, hindering the development of meaningful relationships. Additionally, issues related to privacy and security arise in CMC environments, with the risk of personal information being compromised or misused.
2. Social presence theory suggests individuals perceive varying degrees of intimacy
and sociability in online interactions. It explores how technology affects social interaction by examining how users perceive and react to the presence of others in virtual environments, influencing communication dynamics and outcomes. Social presence theory explores the degree of "presence" individuals experience when interacting with others through mediated communication channels. It suggests that the level of social presence, or the sense of being together with others, varies across different communication mediums. In face-to-face interactions, social presence is typically high due to rich nonverbal cues, fostering intimacy and immediacy. However, in mediated communication contexts such as online forums or text messaging, social presence may be lower due to the absence of these cues. The theory emphasizes the importance of social cues and feedback mechanisms in enhancing social presence within mediated environments. Strategies such as

using emoticons, providing feedback, and incorporating multimedia elements
of Digital Media
aim to compensate for the lack of nonverbal cues and increase social presence. Overall, social presence theory highlights the dynamic interplay between communication mediums and the perceived sense of connection among individuals.
3. Media richness theory posits that communication effectiveness depends on the
medium's ability to convey multiple cues, facilitate immediate feedback, and handle language variety. Rich media (e.g., face-to-face) excel in conveying complex messages, while lean media (e.g., text-based) suit simpler, less ambiguous messages, impacting communication efficiency and outcomes. Media richness theory posits that communication effectiveness is influenced by the richness of the communication medium. According to this theory, communication mediums vary in their ability to convey complex messages and facilitate understanding. Rich media, such as face-to-face interaction, provide immediate feedback, multiple cues, and personalization, enabling the transmission of rich, nuanced information. In contrast, lean media, like text-based emails, offer limited feedback and fewer cues, making them suitable for conveying simple, straightforward messages. Media richness theory emphasizes matching the communication medium to the nature of the message and task requirements. For complex, ambiguous messages requiring rapid feedback and personal interaction, rich media are preferred. Conversely, for routine, well-defined tasks, lean media may suffice. Understanding media richness helps organizations optimize communication strategies and select appropriate channels to enhance efficiency and effectiveness. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Asynchronous communication offers flexibility, allowing participants to respond
at their convenience. It facilitates thoughtful responses and documentation. However, it can lead to delays in decision-making and misunderstandings due to lack of immediate feedback and context. Asynchronous communication offers numerous advantages and disadvantages. On the positive side, it provides flexibility, allowing individuals to communicate without the constraints of real-time interaction. This flexibility is particularly beneficial for those with busy schedules or in different time zones. Additionally, asynchronous communication allows for thoughtful responses as individuals have time to reflect before replying. It also facilitates documentation and archiving of conversations, making it easier to reference past discussions. However, asynchronous communication can lead to delays in decision-making and problem-solving, as responses may not be immediate. Misinterpretation of tone or intent is also a risk, as non-verbal cues such as facial expressions and tone of voice are absent. Furthermore, asynchronous communication may foster a sense of disconnection or isolation among participants, particularly in collaborative endeavours where real- time interaction is beneficial. Lastly, reliance on asynchronous communication can sometimes hinder spontaneous creativity and innovation, as the immediate exchange of ideas may be limited.
2. Social Information Processing Theory proposes that individuals can form
relationships online like face-to-face interactions, given sufficient time to develop trust and intimacy. It suggests that communication cues are adapted

and interpreted differently in online contexts, influencing relational outcomes. Computer-Mediated Communication Social Information Processing Theory (SIPT) posits that individuals can develop relationships and form impressions of others through computer-mediated communication (CMC) despite the absence of physical cues. According to this theory, individuals compensate for the lack of non-verbal cues by utilizing other information available in CMC, such as linguistic cues and contextual information. Through repeated interactions, individuals can develop relationships and social bonds comparable to those formed in face-to-face interactions. SIPT suggests that the process of forming relationships in CMC may take longer compared to face-to-face interactions, as individuals need time to accumulate and interpret social cues. However, once established, these online relationships can be just as meaningful and intimate as offline relationships. SIPT highlights the importance of self-disclosure and reciprocity in online interactions, as they contribute to the development of trust and intimacy. Overall, SIPT provides insight into how individuals navigate and form relationships in online environments, shedding light on the complexities of virtual social interaction.
3. Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) in mass communication enables
rapid dissemination of information to a large audience. It facilitates real-time interactions, enhances audience engagement, and provides a platform for diverse voices. However, it can also lead to information overload, filter bubbles, and digital divides in access and participation. Computer-mediated communication (CMC) plays a significant role in mass communication by facilitating the dissemination of information to large and diverse audiences through digital channels. CMC platforms such as social media, email, and online forums enable mass communication by allowing individuals and organizations to share news, opinions, and multimedia content with a global audience instantaneously. These platforms democratize the flow of information, empowering individuals to participate in public discourse and engage with media content in ways that were previously inaccessible. Additionally, CMC platforms serve as valuable tools for journalists and media professionals to gather news, conduct research, and interact with audiences in real-time. However, CMC also poses challenges for traditional mass communication channels, as the abundance of user-generated content and the proliferation of fake news can undermine the credibility of information disseminated through digital platforms. Furthermore, CMC blurs the boundaries between producers and consumers of media content, challenging traditional notions of media gatekeeping and control. Despite these challenges, CMC has revolutionized mass communication by offering new opportunities for information dissemination, audience engagement, and interactive storytelling.

UNIT 4 NETWORK SOCIETY
Communication Patterns
of Digital Media
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Understanding Network
4.3 Definition of Network Society
4.4 Network Society from Castell's Perspective
4.5 Characteristics of Network Society
4.5.1 Castell Concepts on Social Structure
4.5.2 Main features of Transformation according to Castells
4.6 Features of the Network Society
4.7 Challenges of Network Society
4.8 Let Us Sum Up
4.9 Further Readings
4.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
Society consists of groups of aggregate people. A social group comes into existence when two or more people are in direct or indirect contact and communicate with each other meaningfully. Society, which finds its roots in social interaction, depends on individuals who live by networking with other individuals using various communication formats to share information and views about different issues that interest them. In the era of tremendous technological revolution, individuals depend heavily on various digital formats for networking. The history of the term "network" is extensive and intricate, spanning several academic fields such as sociology, economics, and anthropology. A shared understanding of topology or connectivity between, or even within, disciplines is not what a network is. Instead, it is a contested and 'uncanny' concept, explains Lovink (2002) in his study. The three key sociological and philosophical approaches that have utilised the concept of 'network' are the idea of 'network society' / 'networked capitalism', theories of 'social networking', and actor-network theory. Among the three concepts, 'network society' is explored in the following paragraphs. In this era of digitalisation, it has become normal for people to connect digitally. People denote the digitally connected society using various labels, including information society, global village, wired society, and network society. Since digital networking appears as a natural phenomenon today, the term network society goes further than the information society. Castells, who has promoted the concept of Network Society, primarily goes down to accept that society is not purely based on technology as observed from today's perspective. It is important to note that society is also based on cultural, economic, and political factors along with other elements like religion, cultural upbringing, political organisations, and social status. The level of these factors' influences on individuals can help or hurt these communities. People are getting

connected digitally beyond the limitations of geographical boundaries, and all these Network Society factors contribute primarily to network society. Understanding that "Network Society" refers to a society characterised by the widespread use of information and communication technologies, thus leading to interconnectedness and digital networks, we can broadly understand that its characteristics include digital connectivity, where the society uses digital technologies extensively to live in a networked environment. The primary characteristic of a network society is that the Internet's communication and information exchange usage is common. The second feature of a network society is the ability to connect members beyond geographical boundaries. The members of the society work and stay connected with people worldwide who are known or unknown to them. Among the other characteristics - are the rapidity and widespread of information, which has led to increased access to knowledge and ideas; Decentralisation- where the power and information are now distributed across interconnected nodes in the network; Economic activities turned to digital transactions Ex: e-commerce, digital currency transactions; uncontrolled usage and influence of social media platforms influencing the communication, activism and public discussions; members are empowered concerning publication - the scope to publish their thoughts or access to any information without filters; Formation of virtual communities without any limitations of geographical boundaries based on shared interests and values, transcending geographical boundaries; Evolving forms of governance that leverage digital technologies for decision-making and citizen engagement can be listed as the prime characteristics of society of the new age. The notion of a "Network Society" prompts us to consider the extent to which these technologies have become a part of our lives. In such a society, we can communicate and share information with distant individuals and machines, free from disruption and occasionally unaware of the networks or devices that facilitate this communication.
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Understand the evolution of the term network society; Describe the characteristics of network society; Explain the opportunities and challenges of network society; and Discuss the consequences of network society in various cultural context.
4.2 UNDERSTANDING NETWORK
In this digital era, we can simply understand networking as a facility that connects Internet-facilitated electronic gadgets. In his book "Placing Words, "William Mitchell notes how 'digital devices rarely operate in isolation but are linked to one another by communication channels'. The available 'Network' as per technical terminology may be either localised, Ex, Local Area Network (LAN) or Ethernet in modern society, which depends on computers for all activities; keeping with the requirements of present-day society, the characteristics of computer networks have been developed. The connectivity can cover larger areas without limiting any geographical restrictions.

Communication Patterns Organisations follow well-defined protocols before connecting the computers. This
of Digital Media
means the network does not always have a single structural form while connecting the computers. Manuel Castells, the father of computer networking, tries to correlate the lives of people connected across the globe using computers - Network Society. Manuel Castells is the father figure in the understanding of Network Society. According to Castells 'networks work as emergent structures, and people are interconnected with several nodes. In a network society, the characters of people who come together vary greatly depending on the type of systems they belong to. For example, a network of people belonging to a stock exchange market or the political party of a country. This makes us understand the concept of a Network Society as closely associated with interactions of social implications that arose from globalisation and the significance of electronic communications in society post- globalisation period. Manuel Castells provides a detailed explanation of the concept of the network society and how it works in contemporary society to bring in the desired socio-cultural change. For Castells, the crucial step is to view networks as social structures. He says, 'Networks are open structures, able to expand without limits, integrating new nodes if they can communicate within the network, if they share the communication codes. Castells observes that a network-based social structure is a highly dynamic, open system susceptible to innovating without threatening its balance. A network, then, is a structural form. Though not new, it wears a different look in the digital age. Information technology gives network access to coordinated decision- making, decentralised execution, and task flexibility, providing a better structure for all human action. Therefore, in real life, we can use the idea of a network to represent a society that is becoming more decentralised, adaptable, and personalised. This action then supports Castells' concept of "network society," a form of society defined by the emergence of new "timeless time" and spaces of flows, as well as a change in lived time and space. Nodes can be understood as centres within communication networks that can both receive and send messages. Individuals can be seen as nodes in social media platforms, and automated answering centres, they are in non-human forms. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How do theorists perceive "Network"? write briefly

4.3 DEFINITION OF NETWORK SOCIETY
Network Society is a term framed in 1991. It is thought to represent the social, political, economic, and cultural variations in the networking pattern due to the heavy penetration of digital technologies in communication. The present chapter attempts to understand various aspects concerning the influence of digital technology on society.

It is interesting to note that James Martin utilised the phrase 'The wired Society' in 1978, indicating that the future of society will be connected by mass and telecommunication networks. However, the credit for coining the phrase 'network society' goes to Jan Van Dijk. In a book written by him, De Netwerkmaatschappij, meaning The Network Society, Van Dijk characterises "network society" as a way for society to organise its relationships more and more through media networks, either gradually taking the place of or enhancing face-to-face social networks. This suggests that digital technology supports social networks and even personal communication. Ex: Video Conferencing, WhatsApp. Texting using chat boxes, etc. The pattern does not vary as we move from the individual to the organisational level. Thus, seconding our thoughts that Social media networking platforms are influencing the primary means of communication within organisations and, naturally, the most significant social structures in contemporary society. According to Van Dijk's book, a society's primary mode of organisation and key structures are shaped by a confluence of social and media networks at all levels (individual, organisational, and societal). He compares this kind of society with mass society, constituted by communities, organisations, and groups arranged in physical co-presence. Yet another important definition is from Manuel Castells, a leading theorist on the concept. He defines a Network Society as a "society whose social structure is made up of networks powered by micro-electronics-based information and communications technologies". Castells, in his book The Rise of the Network Society (1996), explains modern society is not defined solely by technology but by the cultural, economic, and political factors that make up a networked society. Castells observes that a network society is a concept related to the social, political, economic, and cultural transformation that has occurred due to the spread of the networks due to the usage of digital and information technologies. The influence can be observed in all fields, including religion, cultural upbringing, political organisation, social status, and any other form of a networked society. He notes that power is dispersed throughout information networks in a network society rather than governed by institutions or symbolic controllers. Hence, we understand that a network society is one whose social structure is made of networks powered by microelectronics-based information and communication technologies. Castells clarified that culture codes communication within a social structure. A collection of linked nodes is called a network. The point where the curve intersects itself is called a node. Different nodes in the network may be relevant. Nodes become more significant to the network due to their increased ability to process and absorb pertinent data. The ability of a node to further the objectives of the network determines its relative importance rather than any feature. Nonetheless, a network's performance depends on every node. Networks tend to rearrange themselves, eliminating some nodes and adding new ones when they become redundant or useless. Nodes are only ever present and serve as parts of networks. A simple example of this could be the interest developed by society members towards a contemporary issue that gradually subsides and loses its importance.
4.4 NETWORK SOCIETY FROM CASTELL'S
PERSPECTIVE
Manuel Castells is a sociologist involved in information society and communications research. Drawing from Alain Touraine's ideas, Castells played a pivotal role in 69

Communication Patterns advancing Marxist urban sociology, highlighting the significance of social movements
of Digital Media
in the turbulent change process. He worked on the role of new technologies in restructuring the society where every member belongs to a network system (for example, the School/College where we study and the profession to which we belong), and all such formed networks need some form of coordination. Castells, in his study, observes that new technologies have induced disconnectedness among the members. People in contemporary society experience a sense of autonomy (ex, apps to translate, purchase, etc). According to Castells, the contemporary social structure of our societies consists of networks. Deliberating particularly on the changes brought in the communication process, Castell notes "how space and time are being transcended in social practices due to the ability to do everything from everywhere to give rise to a new form of society". Castells first mentioned the phrase "network society" in his book "The Rise of the Network Society: The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture", which was the first part of his Information Age trilogy. In his books, Castells argues that the formation of organisations using new methods is largely due to communication technologies, such as mobile telephones. "Communication networks are the patterns of contact that are created by flows of messages among communicators through time and space", observes Castells while talking about how the instantaneous flow and exchange of information, capital, and cultural communication now characterises the global economy. "This means that society's dependence on these new modes of informational flow can give enormous power to those in a position to control them to control us. Networks have become the predominant organisational form of every domain of human activity," Observes Castells. It is useful to revisit Castell's 1989 work to understand his theory of a network society better. "The Informational City: Information Technology, Economic Restructuring, and the Urban Regional Process". He discusses the space of flows in this work, which is important to his theory of the network society. In his view, the space of flows is essential to the network society, which is a communications network delineated by the hubs at the intersections of these networks. Societies are rooted in the space of flows rather than a particular location. Castell explains that "while the space of flows can be abstract in social, cultural, and historical terms, places are condensations of human history, culture and matter" As observed by Castells, technologies have shrunk everything, converting the global community to local where the people have surpassed their dependence on geographical links and have adopted technological links. For example, social networking platforms like WhatsApp, Skype, Teams, Zoom, and Facetime can be used to communicate with each other any number of times without geographical limitations. For Castells, networks are the basic units of modern society. Other aspects that shape society, such as culture, economics, and politics, combined with technology, create a network society. For example, in projects undertaken by different companies, team members working in different parts of the world are brought together until the project is submitted, after which the members are reallocated to a new task, thus forming a new network. This type of work adopted by different companies requires skilled workers to be flexible with their working patterns. The nature of the work also produces a two-pronged process of inclusion and exclusion.

Like most social theorists, Castells has faced criticism on several issues with his Network Society network society theory. Dan Schiller argues that "the main economic drive-in network societies is still the desire to gather private capital; the market imperatives of competition and co-modification still dominate, and the social and economic inequalities characteristic of market economies tend to widen rather than close" (Schiller, 2000, 48). Similarly, Professor Martin Kenney opines that "When Castells does conclude, they can be so aphoristic that their precise meaning can be elusive" (Kenney, Internet Galaxy, 2008). Despite all criticisms, we can observe that Manuel Castells theory of the network society is highly relevant in understanding contemporary forms of social interaction as it permeates most societies in the world belonging to different cultural, geographical, and organisational manifestations. His examination of the institutional, cultural, and technological changes that have caused societies worldwide to become network societies offers insightful information about a rapidly evolving communications landscape. Castells observes that "political institutions are not the site of power any longer and the power in reality rests with the cultural codes, embedded in networks". Studying Castells, we understand that restructuring industrial economics to accommodate an open market approach, freedom-oriented movements (e.g., cultural, feminist), and the revolution in information and communication technologies are the three processes that led to the emergence of the Network Society. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Explain the concept of time and space from Castell's perspective on network
society. Fill in the Blanks:
1. In Network society, social structure is made of networks powered by
based information and communication technologies. Table: 2. A collection of links, is called a network.
4.5 CHARACTERISTICS OF NETWORK SOCIETY
We have witnessed the structural transformation of our world during the past few decades, based on the emergence of new information and communication technologies that took shape in the 1970s. We are aware that technology does not determine society; rather, it is a society that shapes technology according to the needs, values, and interests of people who use the technology. However, since information and communication technologies particularly influence the behavioural patterns of society, the influence of technology on society cannot be neglected. A new type of networking-based social organisation has emerged, and the history of the Internet shows this clearly. This new form of social organisation is based on the spread of networking throughout all spheres of activity that rely on digital communication networks. It can be argued that nowadays, various issues related to life, for example, wealth, power, and knowledge generation, largely depend on the ability to organise society to reap the benefits of the new technological system rooted in microelectronics, computing, and digital communication. Going by the

Communication Patterns explanation provided by Van Dijk in his book The Network Society' we can
of Digital Media
understand that modern or contemporary society has already moved to becoming a network society in the true sense. Manuel Castells's book 'The Network Society' explains, "The network society is global since it is built on global networks, and since networks are the foundation of communication, they can transcend national boundaries. Because of this, it is ubiquitous on Earth, and its logic is transformed and extended to every nation due to the power ingrained in international trade networks for goods and capital. Therefore, another term for the network society is "globalisation," albeit it is more descriptive and less analytical than the term suggests. However, because networks are selective based on their programs and capable of simultaneous communication, the network society spreads worldwide but excludes some people. With the help of the Internet, different levels of communication, such as interpersonal, organisational, and mass communication, have united. People are connected through various Internet-based communication platforms, providing them with constant access to information and means of communication. The Internet has converted the "whole world" into homes and workplaces. The advances in communication technology have made the media dearer and are utilised by greater percentages of people. Usage of different platforms appears as "normal media". Castells' insights into the social and economic dynamics in the information age, which experiences constant change, will be highly valued as a key reference source. The theory provides a good understanding of the present-day society. Castells documents and analyses the constant change that society is experiencing and this significant transition of society through his theory of the network society. Knowledge of this theory is essential when our society is undergoing such profound and powerful transformations that it may even transcend the present technology-based era entirely, and this intriguing and novel character of Castells' theory has made the concept of network society popular.
4.5.1 Castells Concepts on Social Structure
Human societies are made from the constant interaction between humans who live in this organised and given social structure. This social structure is formed based on relationships with elements like consumption, experience, and power. The meaning of words is produced and reproduced due to the exchange of symbolic interaction between the actors in this social structure. Meaning is produced from the symbolic identification of the action between people, and consolidating shared meaning through the crystallisation of practices creates culture. We can also understand that meaning is derived from symbolic interaction between brains, which are socially and ecologically constrained simultaneously. Meaning is also based on the actions of humans, who use experience as a symbol. Experience is the action of humans on themselves, determined by the interplay between their biological and cultural identities. Experience is also structured around relationships between people, organised around any organised structure of the society, including family. There is another layer to the exchange of interaction, and that is due to technology. In his study, Castells explains technology as "the use of scientific knowledge to specify ways of doing things in a reproducible manner". According 72 to him, technology is embodied in technical relationships, which are socially conditioned.

The interaction between people in technical relations is based on the application of Network Society knowledge that could be assigned to the process of production, and the relationship between players is also based on technology-based production, which forms the basis for forming a Network Society.
4.5.2 Main features of Transformation According to Castells
Manuel Castells' theory of the Network Society analyses the impact of information and communication technology on present-day society. The theory analyses the situation, keeping the sociological framework in the background. The key features are: New Technological Paradigm: Today's world is centred around micro-electronics, information/communication technologies, and genetic materials for an exploratory theory of the network society. We must understand that knowledge and information are crucial in all societies. Hence, they are not the only critical characteristic of present society. In present-day society, the Internet has become a universal interactive communication tool as we shift from computer-centred to network-diffused technologies. "What is also characteristic of this technological paradigm is the use of knowledge-based information technologies to enhance and accelerate the production of knowledge and information in a self-expanding, virtuous circle. Because information processing is at the source of life and social action, every domain of our eco-social system is transformed," observes Castells. New Economy: The present-day economy is characterised by three fundamental features. First, it is informational. The capacity to generate knowledge and process/ manage information determines the productivity and competitiveness of all economic units. Second, this new economy is global. The core activities, for example, financial markets, science and technology, and multinational production, depend on highly skilled speciality labour. Of course, all today's jobs may not fit into global outfits, but all economics are influenced by globalisation. "Globalisation is highly selective. It proceeds by linking up all that, according to dominant interests, has value anywhere on the planet, and discarding anything including human resource which has no value or becomes devalued," marks Castells. Third, the new economy is networked. Castells observes, "At the heart of the global economy's connectivity and the flexibility of informational production, there is a new form of economic organisation, the network enterprise. This network is made from either firms or segments of firms and/or from internal segmentation of firms. Large corporations are internally decentralised as networks. Small and medium businesses are connected in networks. These networks connect among themselves on specific business projects and switch to another network after the project is finished. Major corporations work in changing alliances and partnerships specific to a given product, process, time, and space. The new economy, which combines informational, global, and networked, is naturally capitalist. Work and employment: The method of work and employment has substantially transformed the new economy. Induced by globalisation and network enterprise, work and employment are transformed. The most important transformations in employment patterns are flexible work, Part-time work, temporary work, self-

Communication Patterns employment, work by contract, informal or semi-formal labour arrangements, and
of Digital Media
relentless occupational mobility, which are the key features of the new labour market. The work process is interconnected between firms, regions, and countries. In a stepped- up spatial division of labour, networks of locations are more important than hierarchies of places. Labour is fundamentally divided into two categories: self-programmable labour and generic labour. Cultural Sphere: Cultural expressions of all kinds are increasingly enclosed in or shaped by this electronic hypertext. However, the new media system is not characterised by one-way, undifferentiated messages through limited channels that constitute the world of mass media. The media are inclusive by nature and thus bridge each other. Computer-operated digitalised connections provide access to hundreds of channels of interactive communication. Castells observes that today's world lives in a culture of 'real virtuality'. He explains his opinion: "Our symbolic environment is, by and large, structured by this flexible, inclusive hypertext, in which many people surf each day. The virtuality of this text is a fundamental dimension of reality, providing the symbols and icons from which we think and thus exist". Political Sphere: This growing enclosure of communication also affects politics. Media politics needs to convey simple messages. The simplest message is an image that is obviously of a person. The most effective political weapons are negative messages and character assassination of opponents. In the information age, politics has become a very expensive business; parties and leaders use access to power to obtain resources for their trade. Since character assassination needs some substance from time to time, systemic political corruption provides ample opportunity. Time and Space: Castell's hypotheses that two emergent social forms of time and space are characteristics of network society. These are timeless times and the space of flows. He states, "In contrast to the rhythm of biological time characteristic of most of human existence, and to clock time characterising the industrial age, timeless time is denoted using new information/communication technologies in a relentless effort to annihilate time. The space of flows refers to the technological and organisational possibility of organising the simultaneity of social practices without geographical contiguity. Castells introduces the idea of a "space of flows," emphasising the global and decentralised nature of information exchange in contrast to the localised "space of places" characteristic of traditional societies. State the Power Sphere: The central power-holding institution is the state, and it is also undergoing a dramatic transformation process due to digitalisation. Castells observes in his study that "on the one hand, its sovereignty is questioned by global flows of wealth, communication, and information and on the other hand, its legitimacy is undermined by the politics of scandal and its dependence on media politics. The weakening of its power and credibility can induce people to build their systems of defence and representation around their identities, further de-legitimising the state. However, the state does not disappear. It adapts and transforms itself by building partnerships between nation-states and sharing sovereignty to retain influence". Ex: The European Union. We observe decision shift of power towards multinational and transnational institutions, Ex: NATO, IMF/World Bank, United Nations agencies,
74 World Trade Organization,

Check Your Progress: 3 Network Society
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Write briefly about the Technological paradigm.

2. Write briefly about the New Economy.

3. Political Sphere.

4.6 FEATURES OF THE NETWORK
SOCIETY
It refers to societies that show two essential features: sophisticated technologies of networked communication and information management/distribution and the formation of new patterns of transnational economics and society. The advent of the Information Age has given rise to a transformative era known as the Network Society. In this society, we now understand that a social structure emerges from the interplay of technological revolution, particularly affecting information, and technology, which has brought about social change. The present-day paradigm shift can be observed under some key characteristics: Ubiquitous Connectivity: The prime feature of present-day society's high level of connectivity. The privatisation of Internet services and the development of software have enabled increased capacity of telecommunication systems. The deep penetration of the Internet into society and the possibility of accessing the Internet on a wide range of devices has made Earth a global village. Internet usage, which has increased through mobile phones, has facilitated unending communication between people without any restrictions. Individuals connect globally. The message is transacted between people within seconds, which was unimaginable a few decades ago. Digital networks today have created an expanded sense of time and place. Decentralised Communication: Social media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and blogs have empowered individuals to share information, express opinions, and engage in dialogue without control. This decentralisation has democratised the dissemination of information and led to the 'Mass-Self Communication' concept, which means communicating or interacting with many other people without depending on traditional mass media.

Communication Patterns Digital Interactions: The shift towards a Network Society has led to significant
of Digital Media
human interactions in the digital realm. Today, "spaces of virtual reality" have developed beyond imagination. The digital landscape has become integral to social dynamics, from online socialising to virtual workspaces. Using virtual reality, individuals can lead virtual lives. Along with the digitalisation of interactions that have shaped how people form relationships, collaborate, and express themselves, virtual reality interaction has been hybridised, blurring the distinction between real life and virtual life. Information Abundance: Access to the Internet has facilitated a constant inflow of information. People can access information and acquire a vast repository of knowledge through the Internet. E-Learning possibilities are high. Space and Time: The developments in new communication technologies have resulted in globalisation, which has led to the transformation of space and time in human experience. Castells observes space as intangible and based on experience rather than physical reality. Castells calls physical proximity the Space of Contiguity. For example, a call on WhatsApp or Skype provides a feeling of proximity while communicating. This space Is called the Space of Flows. Increased Interdependence: Interconnectedness defines the relationships within the Network Society. Economic, social, and cultural exchanges occur globally, fostering interdependence among individuals and nations. This heightened interconnectivity has positive implications, such as fostering cultural diversity, and challenges, such as the potential for economic dependencies. The emergence of Virtual Communities: The Network Society has witnessed the emergence of virtual communities--groups of individuals connected by shared interests, goals, or identities despite physical separation. Online platforms provide spaces for these communities to thrive, offering a sense of belonging that transcends geographical constraints. While the characteristics of the Network Society bring numerous advantages, they also raise specific challenges. Privacy concerns, digital inequalities, and cybersecurity threats must be addressed as society navigates this evolving landscape. Striking a balance between the positive aspects of connectivity and addressing the associated challenges will be crucial for shaping a sustainable and inclusive Network Society. Other characteristics of a network society include Trust between employees, as the players need to communicate and share information; transformation of Labour skills, as the demand for the workforce, is knowledge of ICT; and an innovative approach to being in the field. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Write briefly about the characteristics of society.

76

4.7 CHALLENGES OF NETWORK SOCIETY
Due to its interconnectivity, the field presents several challenges related to privacy, security, and the constantly changing nature of work. Privacy Concerns: Companies often gather information from social media platforms to promote their products through advertising. Procuring personal data in the digital realm frequently violates privacy ethics. Security Issues: Ensuring the security of online systems and safeguarding sensitive information is challenging. Interconnected computers have exposed personal and private information to threats due to hacking. Data breaches and ransomware attacks are common challenges and pose serious risks to individuals' and businesses data. Organisations and individuals must stay vigilant to keep up with the sophisticated nature of cyber-attacks. Evolving Nature of Work: Changing technology in the digitalisation era has changed working methods. They are working remotely or as a freelancer is more prevalent. Working there offers flexibility and raises concerns related to stability in employment, leave benefits, and many other privileges that a regular employee enjoys. The changing landscape has also blurred the difference between personal and professional life. The situation demands adapting to newer skills and accepting inclusive work environments. Digital Inequality: Despite tremendous progress in digital technology, which has enabled even people living in remote areas to access digital networking facilities, a digital divide exists among people. Access to digital networks is not uniform, as it depends on socioeconomic factors. Additionally, educational disparities and the training received influence job opportunities and quality of life. Addressing these challenges requires a multidimensional approach, demanding a new regulatory framework and societal awareness. Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
(True or False)
1. The extensive collection and utilisation of personal data in the digital realm has
not raised any privacy concerns. (True or False)
2. Ensuring the security of online systems and safeguarding sensitive information
has become a pressing challenge. (True or False)
3. The nature of work in the digital era has blurred personal and professional
boundaries. (True or False)
4. Access to digital networks is uniform, thus bringing uniformity to all. (True or
False)
4.8 LET US SUM UP
In the ever-evolving landscape of human civilisation, the Information Age has ushered in a paradigm shift known as the Network Society. This transformative concept 77

Communication Patterns encapsulates the profound impact of information and communication technologies,
of Digital Media
particularly the Internet, on the fabric of our social, economic, and cultural existence. The Internet works here as the primary catalyst connecting people beyond the limitations of geographical boundaries. It also facilitates instantaneous message exchange between the players. The defining characteristic of the Network Society is the democratisation of information. In addition to unlimited information, it has provided a platform for self- expression. With various social media platforms like blogs and Facebook, an individual is now empowered with an opportunity to disseminate information without any control. The Network Society has also reshaped the economic landscape. Apart from flexibility in working methods, people are becoming digital entrepreneurs. The digital economy thrives on connectivity, fostering innovation and entrepreneurship on an unprecedented scale. The Network Society has given rise to a globalised exchange of ideas and expressions. Cultural products circulate effortlessly across borders, fostering a shared global cultural experience. Network Society is not without challenges. Digital privacy, cybersecurity, and the digital divide highlight the need for responsible governance and ethical considerations in the digital age.
4.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. August, V. (2022). Political ideas of the network society: why
digitalization research needs critical conceptual analysis. Zeitschrift fur Politikwissenschaft, 32(2), 313-335.2. Bajiae, P. (2020). Theoretical and practical aspects of the communication
theory of power in the global network society. Sports, media, and business, 6(1), 19-25.3. Castells, M. (2020). The information city, the new economy, and the
network society. In The information society reader (pp. 150-164). Routledge.
4. Dias, J. A., de Oliveira, D. B., & Ferrer, W. M. H. (2022). Democracy in
the network society: citizenship and popular participation in the smart cities context. Revista Opiniao Juridica, 20(35), 1-20. https://www.redalyc.org/journal/6338/633875006001/633875006001.pdf
5. Fernandez-Ardevol, M., & Ribera-Fumaz, R. (2023). The network
society today. American Behavioral Scientist, 67(7), 839-846.6. Jain, M., Nagpal, A., & Gupta, S. (2020). Network Society--Towards a
Holistic Approach to Human Development in Asia. Role of IT-ITES in
Economic Development of Asia: Issues of Growth, Sustainability and
Governance, 193-208.7. Knell, M. (2021). The digital revolution and digitalized network society.
Review of Evolutionary Political Economy, 2(1), 9-25. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s43253-021-00037-4
8. Sofradzija, H. (2020). Technosociality and the Rise of the Network
Society. In New Technologies, Development and Application III 6 (pp. 432-436). Springer International Publishing.

4.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check your Progress - 1
1. Ref to 4.1 and Ref 4.2
Check Your Progress - 2
1. Ref to 4.4
2. Microelectronics
3. Nodes
Check your Progress - 3
1.4.5.2
2.4.5.2
3.4.5.2
Check your Progress - 4
1. Ref 4.6
Check your Progress - 5
1. F, 2. T, 3. T 4. F

UNIT 5 INFORMATION THEORY
Communication Patterns
of Digital Media
Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.2 Historical background
5.3 Fundamental Concepts in Information Theory
5.4 Classical information theory
5.5 Applications of information theory
5.6 Let Us Sum Up
5.7 Keywords
5.8 Further Readings
5.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
Merriam-Webster dictionary defines communication (to "make common" or" share") as a process by which information is exchanged between individuals through a common system of symbols, signs, or behaviour. Over the years, the world has increasingly been characterised by a constant flow of data, with humans deriving relevant information from this data collected, processed, and disseminated. The currently employed digital technologies produce and store a large amount of data through various digital devices like smartphones, tablets, laptops, and smart devices. Meanwhile, the dictionary defines information as knowledge, the facts provided or learned about something or someone. After reading this definition, some questions immediately come to mind: Does every piece of information convey something? Is there a method of determining which information has richer content than another? Finally, how does one quantify information? Information theory as a discipline was initially established in the twentieth century by the works of Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley in the 1920s and the work of Claude Shannon in the 1940s. Information theory is a topic of applied mathematics, and it is at an intersection of probability theory, statistics, computer science, electrical and information engineering, and statistical mechanics. Information Theory is concerned with quantifying information with related questions: How do we define information? How can we measure it? And How efficiently can we transmit it? The students of mass communication are reading about information theory despite it being a topic of applied mathematics because the information is the source of all communication systems, whether they are analogue or digital, as well as because one of the applications of the theory is to quantify the information in the news. Today, in this information and information processing revolution, one simply breaks down information into its tiniest bits. As communication relies on information exchange, the theory is a mathematical approach to studying the exchange of this information's coding, quantification, storage, and communication. For the students, explaining the theory in this Unit is done without using mathematical formulas or engineering explanations.

Much work has been done on the theory, and essential additions have been made Information Theory since it was formulated, such as its extension into the quantum domain and exploration of the information-theoretic aspects of quantum mechanics. The theory today has implications for practically every field of science, from engineering to biology to medicine and even the social sciences.
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Understand how information is defined. Look at how the information theory was formulated historically. Understand the classical information theory as formulated by Shannon. Understand the various applications of information theory.
5.2 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
A telegraph is a communication system that sends information by making and breaking an electrical connection. Wright (2022) writes that the telegraph (Greek words tele, meaning at a distance, and graphien, meaning to write) was the forerunner of all communication systems. Many principles developed for its working are still used in modern communication and computer networks. Markowsky (2023) notes that when Samuel F.B. Morse 1844 built a telegraph line between Washington D.C. and Baltimore in the USA; he encountered more electrical problems with the signal transmission when the transmission lines were buried in the ground rather than suspended on poles. Similarly, problems associated with transmitting signals over wires were also noticed in 1875 by Alexander Graham Bell, the telephone inventor. Many physicists analysed these signal transmission problems over the wire as a practical engineering problem of consequence during the era of the Telegraph and Telephone. Many inventors worked on the Telegraph. Samuel Morse's telegraph worked using a code called the "Morse Code", which encoded letters with simple "on" and "off" signals of two lengths called dots and dashes (an early example of binarycode used in computers). Such coded messages could be transmitted over large distances using wires. The Morse Code: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Morsecode#/media/ File:CodeMorsedeSamuelMorse1837.jpg 81

Communication Patterns This was followed by the Meyer telegraph, the first to use paper tape with holes
of Digital Media
to record telegraph signals. Subsequently, Emile Baudot developed a better code than the Morse code. Eschner (201) writes that Baudot was the first to recognise the importance of a simple five-bit binary code. His fixed-length binary code is a direct predecessor to today's digital codes. All these developments influenced later work on information theory. Parallel developments were happening in probability (a branch of mathematics concerning events and numerical descriptions of how likely these events were to occur) theory, which laid the groundwork for understanding randomness and uncertainty. Gerolamo Cardano, in the sixteenth century, attempted to analyse "games of chance", Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal, in the seventeenth century, worked on the "problem of points", and Pierre Laplace, in the nineteenth century, completed the classical definition of probability. The formal study of information theory began in 1924 when Harry Nyquist, who was a researcher at Bell Laboratories (a research-and-development arm of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, AT&T), published a paper entitled "Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed" where Nyquist argued that communication channels had a maximum data transmission rate. He derived a formula for calculating that. In 1928, Nyquist's colleague R.V.L. Hartley wrote a paper, "Transmission of Information", which established the first mathematical foundations of information theory (Markowsky, 2023). Vasiloudis (2018) adds Nyquist, in his paper, calculates a formula for the "speed of transmission of intelligence", which is connected to the bandwidth of the channel. Hartley, meanwhile, first uses the word "information" (information could be words, sounds, etc) to describe the "stuff" of communication. He showed information as a quantity that determined the ability of a receiver of a transmission to determine if a particular sequence was intended by the sender of a transmission, regardless of the message. In 1948, Claude Shannon, a mathematician and electrical engineer who also worked in Bell Labs, published a paper, "A Mathematical Theory of Communication", in the Bell System Technical Journal, which led to the birth of the modern Information Theory. The paper looked at the theory where information is sent over a noisy (noise being any factor that interferes with or impedes effective communication between a sender and receiver) channel in the form of a set of messages. The goal is to have the receiver reconstruct these messages despite the channel noise with a low error probability. Markowsky writes that Shannon realised that the common misconception prevalent then was that meaning had an essential role in information. Instead, Shannon felt that communication signals must be treated in isolation from the meaning of the messages they transmit. The second important thing Shannon did was to realise that the amount of information conveyed by a signal was not directly related to the size of the message. Shannon felt that developing a reliable communication system (technical problem) involving sending and receiving messages was more important than questions relating to the meanings of the message (semantic problem). Besides Shannon's seminal work on information theory, many developments were added to his work, including data compression, error-correcting codes, etc. Huffman, 82 for example, introduced the Huffman coding in 1952. This coding technique

compresses data to reduce the message's size without losing details. The code is Information Theory employed on data in which there are frequently occurring characters. Then, there was the development of Error-Correcting Codes. Errors in computer communication typically occur when data bits get corrupted during transmission over the computer network due to noise and network problems. Error-correcting codes (ECC) are numbers generated by specific algorithms for detecting and removing data errors transmitted over noisy channels. Convolution codes are a type of ECC. Peter Elias introduced convolutional codes in 1955, and they are used extensively to achieve reliable data transfer in numerous applications, such as digital video, radio, mobile communications, and satellite communications. The unit of information, "bit", which stands for binary digit, which most of us know so well today, was coined by John Tukey at IBM. Bit is a measure of difference, measuring the distinction between two possibilities called "0" and "1" or "true" and "false," etc. The concept of entropy (a measure of uncertainty) was introduced initially by Clausius in 1865 and later used by Boltzmann and Gibbs in their work on statistical mechanics. The history of information theory also involved Boolean algebra, introduced by George Boole in his first book, The Mathematical Analysis of Logic. In Boolean algebra, the variables' values are the truth values, true and false, usually denoted 1 and 0. Further developments have happened with information theory in the quantum domain and coding theory advancements. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How did the modern Information Theory get conceptualised? What does the
theory aim to achieve?

5.3 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN INFORMATION
THEORY
Quantifying information is the foundation of the field of information theory. Let's understand this with an example. If we were to make a statement, "It is hot in Delhi today", what does this statement convey regarding the information it provides to a reader? The statement does not convey enough information. Why? Because reading this statement compels one to ask a further question to acquire more knowledge. The question is "Hot" about what? Is it hot about another place, for example, the equator, or about another time frame, for example, yesterday? Hence, "It is hot in Delhi today" conveys imprecise information. Instead, if we were to define a day as hot when the temperature is greater than or equal to 40 degrees

Communication Patterns centigrade and less than or equal to 45 degrees centigrade, a reader would know
of Digital Media
more about the term "hot". So now, when one reads "it is hot in Delhi today," one knows that the temperature in Delhi today is greater than or equal to 40 degrees centigrade and lesser than or equal to 45 degrees Celsius. However, with this additional information about the temperature range, there is still uncertainty even though our information now seems better than that received earlier. This is because now, when one utters the above statement with the additional piece of information on temperature range, there is still an equal probability of Delhi's temperature being either 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 or 45-degree centigrade when one claims it is "hot in Delhi today". Hence, we need to supply additional information, for example, "Yesterday was 41 degrees, and it is hotter today", to make the initial statement "It is hot in Delhi today" much sharper and provide more knowledge. Thus, the amount of uncertainty needs to be quantified to measure the information. One approach to defining information content in a message is the Shannon approach, which is the number of bits required to be transmitted to select the correct answer from a list of previously agreed-upon choices. This gives rise to a "decision tree" (a flowchart showing a clear pathway to a decision being made). How many questions need to be asked to arrive at the correct answer? Just like we have a kilogram as a unit to measure weight and one weighs objects using a weighing scale, information can be measured and compared using an "entropy "measurement. Shannon's entropy measures the uncertainty in a system, and that is, in essence, its information content. High entropy means more uncertainty in the information provided, while low entropy means less uncertainty in the information provided. Entropy is calculated using probability. (The mathematical and engineering formulas and calculations are beyond the scope of this Unit) Let's explain this concept of entropy with an example. Suppose there are two people (A and B) with cough and fever who go for a COVID-19 test. The test will yield only two outcomes: they have or don't have the disease. "A" knows he has a high chance (95%) of the disease and a high chance of positive results as he was moving around without a mask, while B faces a 50/50 chance of the disease even though he had his mask on; he was moving around. With all things equal, who do you think has greater uncertainty between "A" and "B"? While "A" is experiencing little uncertainty with regards to the result of his COVID-19 test as he is quite sure he has it, for "B", there is a lot of uncertainty as the result could be either way, just like flipping a coin. This is where entropy comes in. Entropy allows one to make precise statements and perform computations on issues: not knowing how things will turn out (a measure of uncertainty). Then there is the concept of events. The idea behind quantifying information is also the measure of how much surprise there is in an event. Rare events (low probability) are more surprising and, therefore, have more information than common and, hence, high probability. Hence, learning that an unlikely event has occurred is more informative than learning that a likely event has occurred, as rare events are more uncertain and, therefore, surprising, thus requiring more information to represent them than common events. The basic building block of information is Bits, which can be held in two states: 0 or 1, yes or no and True or False. When bits come together in a specific order, they form patterns representing meaningful information. These patterns create

messages. Here again, entropy is used to measure a message's uncertainty. High Information Theory entropy denotes more unpredictability. In transmitting signals(messages), compression is a more innovative way to shorten messages without losing important information. It is like using abbreviations and shortcuts in messaging. Besides compression, coding is a way to send messages reliably. Coding is a secret language between two people that ensures messages arrive correctly. Finally, message channels often have noise and/or interference. Information theory helps design systems, using, for example, Error Correction Codes, that can handle these disturbances and deliver messages accurately.
5.3 CLASSICAL INFORMATION THEORY
An excellent way to understand information theory is to begin with Shannon's communication model, as shown in the figure.
Shannon's Communication Model
The message source is an entity creating the message. The source could be a human, animal, computer, or inanimate object. The source is connected to an encoder, which converts the messages into signals, which are then carried by a channel. The channel is a medium for carrying the signals(message). Noise is anything that interferes with the transmission of signals in the channel. This is followed by a decoder, which converts the signals back into a message the receiver can comprehend. Like the source, the receiver can be a person, animal, computer, or inanimate object. Shannon's information theory focused primarily on the encoder, channel, noise source, and decoder, the communication system, or the technology element of communication, ignoring the meaning of the sender, receiver, and message. Communication on the channel can be in the presence or absence of noise, referred to as noisy or noiseless communication. Besides the noise in the channel, messages can be transmitted via discrete(digital) or continuous(analogue) signals. Discrete represents a finite number of recognisable states, while continuous signals can vary over infinite values. Hence, the various ways communication over the channel could be done are discrete noise, discrete noiseless, continuous noise, and continuous noiseless. Vasiloudis (2018) explains how Shannon, in his paper, proposed a unit for measuring information transmitted on the channel, terming it as "binary digits" or "bits" (A bit is an event with two possible outcomes of equal probability) for short. He then derived a channel capacity formula determining any communication channel's absolute speed limit. Shannon, from that channel limit, showed that it was possible to devise error-correcting codes in a noisy channel that will overcome any level of noise in

Communication Patterns the channel so that original signals can be reconstructed irrespective of the presence
of Digital Media
of noise. Further, by stating that the entropy connects information to the amount of choice available when constructing messages, it measures the uncertainty involved in the "selection of an event or how uncertain one is of the outcome". Further, Shannon made a fundamental connection between information and probabilities; they were intrinsically connected. That an event carries information related to the probability of observing it, as defined by Shannon's entropy. Let's understand the above more simply. Firstly, information theory is concerned with only the technological element of communication and not the semiotic (anything that communicates intentional and unintentional meaning or feelings) part. Let's assume one was to send a message to one's friend. With the help of information theory, one can measure and manage information in the best way possible. This works in the following way: The bit is the smallest piece of information or the basic unit. Bits are like tiny switches representing two values (yes/no; true/false; 1/0). Messages and patterns are nothing but putting bits together. Bits organised into patterns make meaningful information. For example, a simple message like "Hi" can be represented by a series of bits. Each letter is assigned a pattern of bits that, when combined, create the word "Hi". Entropy is an important concept in information theory. If the message is very predictable, it has low entropy, while unpredictability raises entropy. Uminsky (2023) explains this with a simple scenario of a transmitter, which is the source of a finite number of messages (Remember, these messages' content or meanings are not considered). The Theory is only concerned with which message is sent out among a group of messages. Thus, the more messages a transmitter can transmit, the more uncertain the receiver is about which message will be sent. The more uncertain the receiver is about which message is sent, the more (Shannon) information there is. He demonstrates this with a simple example (the mathematical formulas and calculations have been removed as they are beyond the scope of this Unit) where messages are equally likely to be transmitted. If a message source(transmitter) can send only one possible message, the chance that the receiver will receive that message is 100%. Therefore, the receiver is 100% certain about which message will be received, or the receiver is 0% uncertain about which message will be received. Hence, in this case, one will have 0 bits of "Shannon information, "corresponding to 0 bits of uncertainty or 0 bits of Shannon entropy. Alternatively, suppose the message source(transmitter) can send two possible messages instead of the one in the above example. In that case, there is an equal likelihood that either of the two messages will be sent. Now, the chance that the receiver will receive one message out of the two is 50%. Thus, the receiver is less certain (or more uncertain compared to the earlier scenario of a single message) about which message will be sent. In this case, one will have 1 bit of Shannon 86 information corresponding to 1 bit of uncertainty or 1 bit of Shannon entropy.

Thus, the number of bits of information (or entropy) increases with the uncertainty Information Theory of which message will be sent. Hence, classical information theory is a way to understand how information is measured, optimised, represented, processed, and transmitted in the everyday sending and receiving of messages. (The mathematical and engineering formulas and calculations are beyond the scope of this Unit.) Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain classical information theory in simple terms.

5.4 APPLICATION OF INFORMATION THEORY
Numerous real-world applications exist across various fields. This is due to Information Theory's ability to quantify, analyse, and manage information. Some of its applications are as follows. Entropy in mass communication and news content analysis refers to the degree of uncertainty or disorder in a set of information. In news stories, entropy can be used to measure the unpredictability or randomness of the content. The concept is often applied to understanding the diversity, complexity, and variability level in the information presented. News content analysis involves systematically examining and evaluating the content of news stories to identify patterns, themes, and trends. Entropy can be useful in this process, as it helps assess a news narrative's richness or information density. High entropy suggests a greater diversity of topics, viewpoints, or sources, while low entropy indicates a more focused and predictable information environment. Information value, on the other hand, is related to the significance or importance of the content within news stories. It reflects how the information provided contributes to the audience's understanding of an issue or event. High information value implies that the content is substantial, relevant, and likely to impact the audience's knowledge or opinions. The relationship between entropy and information value can be complex. While high entropy may indicate a broad range of information, it does not necessarily guarantee high information value. Some information may be redundant, trivial, or irrelevant, contributing little to the audience's understanding of the subject. Conversely, a low-entropy news story may have high information value if it effectively communicates essential, impactful details. Researchers and analysts use various methods, such as content analysis techniques and information theory principles, to quantify entropy and assess information value in news stories. These analyses help media professionals, scholars, and policymakers understand the dynamics of information dissemination, the quality of news content, and its potential impact on public perception and decision-making. 87

Communication Patterns In the same way, detecting misinformation often involves analysing the entropy
of Digital Media
of information sources or narratives. Misinformation may introduce inconsistencies, contradictions, or a lack of coherence, leading to higher entropy in the information. The theory is also used in communication systems for applications like data compression algorithms, such as JPEG for images and MP3 for audio, to reduce the amount of data bits needed for transmission or storage without losing essential information. Coding, a branch of information theory, is vital for designing error correction codes used in Wi-Fi, cellular networks, and satellite communications to help correct errors introduced during data transmission. Information theory principles help design and analyse cryptographic systems to ensure secure communication. They are also applied in image and signal processing to quantify information content, identify patterns, and enhance the quality of signals and images, as well as in Speech Recognition to analyse and model the information in speech signals. Cybersecurity uses anomaly detection by analysing deviations from expected patterns in network traffic, helping identify potential security threats. Entropy measures assess data randomness and detect anomalies or malicious activities in various cybersecurity applications. Data Science and Machine Learning use Information theory, for example, in feature selection techniques to identify and select the most relevant features for machine learning models, which helps improve model efficiency and performance. Entropy and mutual information are used in clustering algorithms and pattern recognition to quantify the information shared between variables. Then there is the field of quantum computing, where Information Theory plays a crucial role in understanding and manipulating quantum states. Quantum information theory is essential for developing quantum algorithms and ensuring the security of quantum communication. Besides the above applications, information theory is also used in biology, genetics, economics, and finance. Information theory is applied in bioinformatics, particularly in DNA sequencing and analysis. It helps identify patterns in genetic data, discover functional elements, understand the information content encoded in DNA sequences, analyse neural spike patterns, and understand the coding and transmission of information in the nervous system. It is also employed in finance to optimise investment portfolios by quantifying the information content of different assets and assessing their relationships. It is also applied to study market efficiency, information asymmetry, and the flow of information in financial markets. One of the early commercial applications of this theory was in seismic oil exploration. Information theory and its application in digital signal processing made it possible to strip off and separate unwanted noise from the desired seismic signal, significantly improving resolution and image clarity during oil explorations. The principles derived from information theory continue to play a crucial role in advancing technology and understanding the fundamental nature of information in different domains.

Check Your Progress: 3 Information Theory
Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Describe some of the applications where information theory is used.

5.5 LET US SUM UP
Information theory as a discipline was established in the twentieth century by the works of Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley in the 1920s and Claude Shannon in the 1940s. Information theory is an applied mathematics topic at the intersection of probability theory, statistics, computer science, electrical and information engineering, and statistical mechanics. It concerns quantifying information, with related questions: How do we define information? How can we measure it? And how efficiently can we transmit it? Much work has been done on the theory, and significant additions have been made since it was formulated. The telegraph was the forerunner of all communication systems, and many of the principles developed for its operation are still used in modern communication and computer networks. In 1948, Claude Shannon, a mathematician and electrical engineer, published a paper, "A Mathematical Theory of Communication", in the Bell System Technical Journal, which led to the birth of the modern Information Theory. Shannon realised that the common misconception prevalent then was that meaning had an essential role in information. Instead, Shannon felt that communication signals must be treated in isolation from the meaning of the messages they transmit. The second important thing Shannon did was to realise that the amount of information conveyed by a signal was not directly related to the size of the message. Shannon's information theory focused on the encoder, channel, noise source, and decoder. Shannon, in his paper, proposed a unit for measuring information transmitted on the channel, terming it as "binary digits" or "bits" (A bit is an event with two possible outcomes of equal probability) for short. He then derived a channel capacity formula determining any communication channel's absolute speed limit. Clausius introduced the concept of entropy (a measure of uncertainty) in 1865, and Boltzmann and Gibbs later used it in their work on statistical mechanics. Shannon's entropy connects information to the amount of choice available when constructing messages; it measures the uncertainty involved in "selecting an event or how uncertain one is of the outcome". Numerous real-world applications exist across various fields. Entropy, in the context of mass communication and news content analysis, refers to the degree of uncertainty

Communication Patterns or disorder in a set of information. High entropy suggests a greater diversity of topics,
of Digital Media
viewpoints, or sources, while low entropy indicates a more focused and predictable information environment. Information value, on the other hand, is related to the significance or importance of the content within news stories. Researchers and analysts use various methods, such as content analysis techniques and information theory principles, to quantify entropy and assess information value in news stories. These analyses help media professionals, scholars, and policymakers understand the dynamics of information dissemination, the quality of news content, and its potential impact on public perception and decision-making. Detecting misinformation often involves analysing the entropy of information sources or narratives. The theory is also used in communication systems for applications like data compression algorithms, for example, JPEG for images and MP3 for audio; designing error correction codes used in Wi-Fi, cellular networks, and satellite communications to help correct errors introduced during data transmission; and helping to design and analyse cryptographic systems to ensure secure communication. Cybersecurity uses anomaly detection by analysing deviations from expected patterns in network traffic, helping identify potential security threats. Data Science and Machine Learning use Information theory, for example, in feature selection techniques to identify and select the most relevant features for machine learning models. Besides the above applications, information theory is also used in biology, genetics, economics, and finance. One of the early commercial applications of this theory was seismic oil exploration, which was made possible by information theory and its application in digital signal processing.
5.6 KEYWORDS
Channel Noise : In communication systems, noise is an error or undesired random disturbance of a useful information signal. Noise is, however, typically distinguished from interference, Coding: In computer terminology, it is transforming computer instructions into a form a computer can understand. It can also mean the act or process of expressing a message in words, images, sounds, or any other set of symbols or signs that two parties communicating can mutually understand. Decision Tree : A type of flowchart that shows a clear pathway to how a decision has been made. A decision tree starts at a single point (or 'node') and then branches (or 'splits') in two or more directions. Each branch offers different possible outcomes, incorporating a variety of decisions and chance events until an outcome is achieved. Their appearance is tree-like when shown visually, which is how this name was given. Decision trees are extremely useful for data analytics and machine learning because they break down complex data into more manageable parts. Noise : Any factor that interferes with or impedes effective communications between a sender and receiver.

Probability is the branch of mathematics concerning events Information Theory and numerical descriptions of how likely they are to occur. The probability of an event is a number between 0 and 1; the larger the probability, the more likely an event is to occur.
5.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Eschner, K. (2017, September 11). The Roots of Computer Code Lie in Telegraph
Code. https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/roots-computer-code-lie- telegraph-code-180964782/
2. Markowsky, G. (2023, December 15). Information theory. https://
www.britannica.com/science/information-theory
3. Uminsky, S. (2023, December 4). Information Theory Demystified. http://
www.ideacenter.org/contentmgr/showdetails.php/id/1236
4. Vasiloudis, T. (2018, April 30). A Brief History of Information Theory. http://
tvas.me/articles/2018/04/30/Information-Theory-History.html.
5. Wright, G. (2022, February). Telegraph. https://www.techtarget.com/
searchunifiedcommunications/definition/telegraph
5.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The formal study of information theory began in 1924 when Harry
Nyquist, a researcher at Bell Laboratories, published a paper entitled "Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed", where Nyquist argued that communication channels had a maximum data transmission rate. He derived a formula for calculating that. In 1928, Nyquist's colleague R.V.L. Hartley wrote a paper, "Transmission of Information", which established the first mathematical foundations of information theory. In 1948, Claude Shannon, a mathematician and electrical engineer who also worked in Bell Labs, published a paper titled "A Mathematical Theory of Communication", leading to modern Information Theory's birth. Quantifying information is the foundation of information theory, which answers questions related to the definition, measurement, and efficient transmission of information. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Classical Information Theory can be explained by looking at Shannon's
communication model. The message source is an entity creating the message. The source is connected to an encoder, which converts the messages into signals, which are then carried by a channel. Noise is anything that interferes with the transmission of signals in the channel. This is followed by a decoder, which converts the signals back into a message the receiver can comprehend. Shannon's information theory focused primarily on the encoder, channel, noise source, and decoder, the communication system, or the technology

Communication Patterns element of communication, ignoring the message's sender, receiver and
of Digital Media
meaning. Discrete units measuring information transmitted on the channel were termed "binary digits" or "bits." Shannon then derived a channel capacity formula to determine any communication channel's absolute speed limit. From that channel limit, he showed that it was possible to devise error-correcting codes in a noisy channel that will overcome any level of noise in the channel so that original signals can be reconstructed irrespective of the presence of noise. Further, by stating that entropy connects information to the amount of choice available when constructing messages, it measures the uncertainty involved in the "selection of an event or how uncertain one is of the outcome". An event carries information related to the probability of observing it. Hence, classical information theory is a way to understand how information is measured, optimised, represented, processed, and transmitted in the everyday sending and receiving of messages. Check Your Progress: 3
1. News content analysis involves systematically examining and evaluating the
content of news stories to identify patterns, themes, and trends. Entropy can be useful in this process, as it helps assess a news narrative's richness or information density. High entropy suggests a greater diversity of topics, viewpoints, or sources, while low entropy indicates a more focused and predictable information environment. Similarly, detecting misinformation often involves analysing the entropy of information sources or narratives. Other applications where the theory is used include communication systems for applications like data compression algorithms, for example, JPEG for images and MP3 for audio, for designing error correction codes used in Wi-Fi, cellular networks and satellite communications to help correct errors introduced during data transmission, design and analyse cryptographic systems to ensure secure communication, image and signal processing to quantify information content, identify patterns, and enhance the quality of signals, cybersecurity uses anomaly detection by analysing deviations from expected patterns in network traffic, helping identify potential security threats, data science and machine learning use in feature selection techniques to identify and select the most relevant features for machine learning models and in quantum computing to understanding and manipulating quantum states. Information theory is also used in biology, genetics, economics, and finance. It is applied in bioinformatics, particularly in DNA sequencing and analysis, while in finance, it optimises investment portfolios byquantifying the information content of different assets and assessing their relationship.

Block-2

BLOCK 2 CRITIQUES OF CYBERSPACE
After having a broad understanding of human communication through cyberspace in Block 1, you will learn some of the important critical aspects of cyberspace in Block 2. The vast networks of digital space challenge the offline perspectives and provide a platform for interested-minded people to gather for purpose. Through common community spaces or individual spaces, someone can work independently or with a group. For all these activities, cyberspaces break the barriers of time and space. You will learn these concepts in detail through the Units of Block 2.
Unit 6: Post-Humanism and Cyborg Manifesto. This Unit explores the realms
of Post-humanism and the Cyborg Manifesto, where traditional notions of humanity are challenged, and the fusion of biology and technology reshapes our understanding of existence. This Unit explores into this modern theoretical framework and unravels the intricate web of human-technology-nature dynamics, exploring the evolution of concepts and their profound cultural impacts. From philosophical ponderings to real- world applications, prepare to transcend conventional boundaries and embrace the dawn of a new era.
Unit 7: Identities and Communities Online explore online identities and
communities. This Unit critically examines our virtual selves, from discerning online versus offline personas to understanding community dynamics. We will navigate the complexities of identity management and participation etiquette in the digital sphere.
Unit 8: Pop Culture and Online Expression. In this Unit, we explore the
dynamic world of popular culture and its manifestation in the digital sphere. We begin by understanding the essence of pop culture, distinguishing it from high and low culture, and exploring its transmission through mass media. Through discussions on cultural values and consumption patterns, we unravel the rise of pop culture alongside the surge of digital media, leading to cultural convergence. Furthermore, we dissect online expression, from creation to consumption, while addressing pertinent concerns such as privacy issues and cyberbullying.
Unit 9: Online Communication and Collaborations. This Unit explores the
dynamic realm of online interaction and teamwork facilitated by digital technology. Understanding how communication and collaboration operate within this digital sphere becomes crucial as the Internet continues to shape our global landscape. We will explore the evolution, tools, platforms, benefits, challenges, and ethical considerations of online communication and collaborations. Online interactions have become more complex with viral shorts, reels, or social media posts/handles. These Units will give you an adequate understanding of the ongoing media transformation.

UNIT 6 POST-HUMANISM AND CYBORG
Cyborg Manifesto
MANIFESTO
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 Introduction to Post-humanism
6.2.1 Definition and Origins
6.2.2 Evolution of the Concept
6.2.3 Key Theoretical Foundations
6.3 Media Technologies and Post-human Experiences
6.3.1 Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality
6.3.2 Digital Dualism Reconsidered
6.3.3 Mediated Perception and Experience
6.4 Introduction to "A Cyborg Manifesto"
6.4.1 Overview of Donna Haraway's Work
6.4.2 Context and Influences
6.5 Cyborg Identity and Politics
6.5.1 Intersectionality in Cyborg Politics
6.5.2 Critique of Essentialism
6.6 Technological Hybridity
6.6.1 Integration of Biological and Technological Components
6.6.2 The Cyborg as a Fusion of Nature and Culture
6.6.3 Scope in Cyborg Technological Development
6.7 Cyborgs and Feminism
6.7.1 Critique of Traditional Feminism
6.7.2 The Cyborg as a Feminist Figure
6.7.3 Gender and Technology in Haraway's Framework
6.8 Cyborgs in Popular Culture
6.8.1 Representation of Cyborgs in Film, Literature, and Media
6.8.2 Cultural Impact of Haraway's Cyborg Concept
6.9 Relevance of the Cyborg Manifesto Today
6.9.1 Contemporary Applications of Haraway's Ideas
6.9.3 Challenges and Opportunities
6.10 Let Us Sum Up
6.11 Keywords
6.12 Further Readings
6.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers

6.0 INTRODUCTION
Post-humanism, a modern theoretical framework, challenges fundamental ideas in Western culture. Emerging from diverse disciplines like philosophy, science, literature, and communication studies, it questions how humans relate to the natural world. Gaining prominence in the late 20th and 21st centuries, especially amid growing ecological awareness, post-humanism redefines the human subject's connection to the Earth. Coined by Ihab Hassan in 1977, post-humanism explores intersections between humans, non-humans, and technology. Simultaneously, the concept of "cyborgs'' (cybernetic organisms) arises, denoting living beings with both biological and mechanical elements. Originating in 1960, the term distinguishes itself from bionic or android, representing organisms whose functions are restored or enhanced by integrating artificial components. Once confined to fiction, cyborgs are now experimented with as people insert circuits into their bodies, sparking debates on creating augmented humans.
6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Develop a comprehensive understanding of post-humanism and cyborg theories and concepts; Gain in-depth knowledge of the historical context and basics of post-humanist and cyborg discourses; Understand the cultural implications of post-humanism and cyborg concepts; Explore principles of integrating post-humanism and cyborg perspectives in various fields; Recognize the application of post-humanist and cyborg theories in media professions and beyond; and Envision future trends and developments in post-humanism and cyborg discourses within the evolving technological landscape.
6.2 INTRODUCTION TO POST-HUMANISM
Post-humanism, a prevalent mode of thought in the late twentieth and twenty-first centuries, emerges at the intersection of human, non-human, and technological realms, gaining prominence amidst ecological consciousness and environmental activism questioning humanity's role in shaping Earth's destiny. It combines philosophical, literary, and artistic reactions to technological progress, globalisation, and mass extinction in the Anthropocene era. It is crucial to differentiate post-humanism from transhumanism. On the one hand, post-humanism involves a deconstructionist critique of humanist values; on the other, transhumanism advocates using technology to surpass human biological limitations, maintaining a connection to traditional humanist beliefs. The "post-human condition" often evokes the image of the cyborg, emphasising the implications of human interaction with new technologies. In essence, post-humanism challenges conventional ontologies, recognizing the complex interaction between humans, the environment, and evolving technologies in shaping the future.

6.2.1 Definition and Origins Post-Humanism and
Cyborg Manifesto
Post-humanism is like a newer version of an old way of thinking called humanism, and it involves a bunch of different ideas from various smart people in areas like philosophy, science, literature, and communication studies. These ideas challenge the old belief that humans are super special and can do whatever they want, suggesting that we should blur the lines between humans, animals, and technology. This post- humanist thing has been around since the 1990s and says that in our future, we won't be the only ones in charge of what's right or wrong. Some people, called transhumanists, even think we can change our bodies a lot with technology, like placing implants or making our brains super smart. Philosopher Donna Haraway says this won't make us superheroes. Still, it might help us see that we're all connected, breaking down old ideas about differences between men and women or between humans and everything else.
6.2.2 Evolution of the Concept
The idea behind the post-human condition is that living things have a complex structure beyond our usual explanations. Post-humanism explores how nature and culture interact and challenges our usual ideas about human nature. It raises questions about improving our bodies, facing ethical issues, and advancing genetics and the brain. With technological progress, we're forced to rethink what it means to be human. This challenges traditional views and creates a crisis in understanding human nature. While post-humanist ideas have been around for a while, they've gained much attention in recent years, especially in academic discussions. It has become its study area, giving us new perspectives on who we are and what we can become.
6.2.3 Key Theoretical Foundations
The concept of the post-human shift represents a profound re-evaluation of traditional understandings of humanity and human identity. It challenges the Eurocentric notions that have historically dominated discussions of what it means to be human. Eurocentric ideals are often based on a particular vision of 'Man' that reflects European cultures' values, perspectives, and experiences. This perspective has historically positioned 'Man' as the universal standard against which all other forms of humanity are measured. However, the post-human shift destabilised this concept by emphasising the diversity of human experiences and challenging the notion of a singular, universal 'Man'. Post-humanism draws from poststructuralist theories that deconstruct stable categories like 'Man' or 'humanity.' The concept of the post-human shift challenges traditional notions of humanity and the centrality of human identity. It emerges from a complex philosophical, technological, and cultural interchange. Jacques Derrida and Michel Foucault question that identity and power are always fixed. They suggest that we can think about people and their power in new ways, going beyond what we're used to. Post-humanism builds upon this deconstructive impulse by destabilising anthropocentric assumptions. Nietzsche highlighted the consequences of valuing humanity to a great extreme. This led to the development of a model different from humanism and antihumanism. Post- humanism emerges as an evaluation of humanist theory without embracing antihumanism.

Critiques of Cyberspace The roots of post-humanism theory can be traced back to the Macy conferences on cybernetics (1946-1953), where scholars aimed to revise humanism by removing the human species' unique privileges compared to animals, the environment, and machines.
6.3 MEDIA TECHNOLOGIES AND POST-HUMAN
EXPERIENCES
Media technologies, like virtual reality, augmented reality, social media networks, etc., are important in how we experience things as post-human beings. Nowadays, we deal with various technologies that change how we see and interact with the world. Virtual reality, social media, and augmented reality are like superheroes in this, helping us connect and talk with others in ways different from the usual face- to-face talks. These tech tools are now part of our everyday lives, creating new ways to talk, express ourselves, and figure out who we are. As we use these tools, the idea of being post-human, where technology and humans mix, becomes more considerable. This blend challenges what we usually think about being human, bringing in a time of even better connections, cool AR (Augmented Reality) and VR (Virtual Reality) stuff, and changes in how we show who we are.
6.3.1 Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality
Virtual Reality is like a super cool computer-made world that feels real, and you can jump in using a VR headset. You're not just watching stuff - you're right there, part of the action, whether in a movie, a video game, or something educational like learning surgeries or getting better at sports. Even though VR seems all futuristic now, it started in the 1950s with something called Sensorama. Picture this: a cool seat with 3D movies, scents, and vibrations to make it feel real. VR got even cooler with better devices and software as time went on. VR has different types. One is Non-Immersive VR, where you control things on a computer, like in video games, but the game world doesn't react to you. Then there's Fully Immersive VR - the real deal. You wear special gear like helmets and gloves connected to a powerful computer, making you feel like you're totally inside the game. Imagine playing a shooting game in a room all set up for it! Semi-immersive VR is a mix of both. You can walk around a 3D world using a computer or a VR headset, but you're not doing all the superphysical stuff. And there's Collaborative VR, where people from different places can hang out in a virtual world, chat, and team up on different tasks. So, VR is not just a game; it's a whole bunch of experiences you can dive into, each with its coolness level. It's like bringing your imagination to life!
Augmented Reality
Augmented Reality (AR) is an enhanced depiction of the physical world using digital elements derived from technology. Unlike virtual reality, which puts users into fully immersive environments using headsets, augmented reality adds digital elements to what you see in the real world but with fewer ways to interact with them. It enriches the real environment by incorporating computer-generated visuals, sounds, and other stimuli, providing users with a heightened, immersive experience. Commercially, AR proves valuable for increasing brand awareness and driving sales.

AR applications are commonly accessible through smartphones. They utilise the Post-Humanism and
Cyborg Manifesto
device's camera to display the real world on the screen. Users then activate AR applications to enhance their surroundings through digital overlays, such as superimposed images, 3D models, real-time directions, labels, colour changes, and appearance alterations using filters on platforms like Instagram and Snapchat. AR is compatible with various devices, including screens, glasses, handheld and mobile devices, and head-mounted displays, with the technology's versatility continuing to expand.
6.3.2 Digital Dualism Reconsidered
Digital dualism, the idea that online and offline realities are separate, is becoming less popular with the rise of social media. Earlier, people thought digital content belonged to a virtual world distinct from the physical one. Nowadays, platforms like Twitter and Facebook connect people both online and offline. People make friends online on networking sites and then meet them in person, strengthening their relationships. As technology becomes part of daily life, the line between virtual and physical blurs, and many see the virtual world as a real part of life. Jurgenson, who introduced "digital dualism," argues against this, saying the virtual world reflects the real one. Scholars challenging digital dualism want a nuanced view, understanding how digital and physical experiences are interconnected, influencing each other. They aim for a holistic approach, recognizing how digital technologies shape identities and relationships in everyday life.
6.3.3 Mediated Perception and Experience
Perception is how our minds process sensory input to respond appropriately, turning raw data into meaningful information. "Mediated perception and experience" refer to how media and technology influence our view of the world. Today, people interact with their surroundings through mediated channels like TV, social media, and virtual reality. Imagine a small wearable device for augmented reality games worn on the head. It uses dual cameras to capture visual data, record and filter it, and then display it on a built-in LCD screen. With its own system and graphics card, this device enhances the augmented reality experience. Observation can be direct, experiencing events first-hand, or mediated, involving tools like cameras. Understanding mediated perception shows how technology impacts how we experience the world.
6.4 INTRODUCTION TO "A CYBORG MANIFESTO"
The cyborg idea is often used in literature and cultural discussions to mix organic and technological elements and challenge fixed identity categories like gender, race, and ability. According to Donna Haraway in 'The Cyborg Manifesto', cyborgs represent hybrid objects that break down fixed identities and open up possibilities for new, diverse forms. Unlike robots, cyborgs, conceptualised by NASA scientists Nathan Kline and Manfred Clynes in the 1960s, aim to overcome physical and mental limitations, especially in extra-terrestrial environments. The Cyborg Foundation, started by Neil Harbisson and Moon Ribas in 2010, works to help humans change into cyborgs, enhancing senses and abilities through cybernetic extensions. Cyborgs are divided into Convenient and Conditional types. Convenient Cyborgs often use exoskeletons to accommodate human preferences, allowing alterations based on personal needs. Conditional Cyborgs focus on

Critiques of Cyberspace replacing designed or injured body parts with bionic implants to restore normal functionality. The cyborg is explored in the literature to question identity categories, especially gender. Examples like the English novelist Mary Shelley's Frankenstein depict the monster as a cyborg created from human and animal parts, raising questions of identity. Ursula K. Le Guin's The Left Hand of Darkness features androgynous inhabitants who can become either male or female, blurring the lines between them. The cyborg concept is a powerful lens for examining identity boundaries in diverse narratives.
6.4.1 Overview of Donna Haraway's Work
Born in 1944, Donna Haraway questions unquestioning acceptance of oppositions in science, focusing on biology, like human-animal, mind-body, and male-female distinctions. She is known for reactivating the term 'cyborg,' blending cybernetic, non-organic, and organic qualities, aligning with socialist- and eco-feminism. Haraway argues that the current political, social, and economic system relies on constructed narratives, not essential scientific truths. Haraway's manifesto asserts that "we are cyborgs," both machine and organism, shaping our ontology and politics. With more females than males, the cyborg lays the foundation for a new feminist relationship with technology.
6.4.2 Context and Influences
In 1984, Donna Haraway wrote the Cyborg Manifesto during postmodernist thought, feminist discussions in the 1980s, and the rise of cybernetic technologies. With a background in biology and philosophy, Haraway explored how technology impacts society and questioned fixed identity categories. Her manifesto, responding to essentialist feminist views, became influential in feminist theory, technology studies, and critical discussions. It emerged in a dynamic era of political activism and technological progress, breaking down normative binaries and impacting discussions about identity and technology. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1) Explain the significance of post-humanism and cyborg concepts in shaping cultural
narratives and redefining human experience.

2) Analyse how the cultural representations and perceptions of cyborgs have
evolved, reflecting changing attitudes toward technology and humanity.

3) Identify a specific instance of a cyborg or post-humanist concept in popular Post-Humanism and
Cyborg Manifesto
culture and explore its cultural implications. Share insights on how it challenges or reinforces cultural norms.

4) Explore how post-humanism and cyborg concepts influence cultural storytelling
and artistic expression.

6.5 CYBORG IDENTITY AND POLITICS
In her 1981 essay, feminist technology theorist Donna Haraway advocated using cyborgs to reshape politics. She proposed dismantling mythical origin stories that perpetuate divisions based on race, class, gender, and other societal lines. By altering how these stories are told, especially by amplifying women's and people of colour's voices, Haraway envisioned new possibilities for freedom and justice. Her cyborg politics embraced cutting-edge technologies as liberating tools, avoiding blanket blame or unwarranted celebration of technology. These politics centred on human questions of belonging, difference, production, consumption, waste, and renewal, impacting humans and non-human planetary companions. Haraway emphasised an expanded sense of empathy while cautioning against accelerating toxic waste from discarded implants, stressing the interconnected stories involving cyborgs, humans, and non- humans in our complex political landscape.
6.5.1 Intersectionality in Cyborg Politics
Looking at cyborg politics through intersectionality means examining how the mix of technology, identity, and power dynamics shapes people's experiences. Intersectionality focuses on recognizing inequalities in technology access based on social categories, creating uneven opportunities that can worsen existing disparities tied to race, class, gender, and more. Identity aspects like gender, race, and disability intersect with technology use, affecting individuals in different ways. For instance, a disabled person's experience with assistive technology differs from that of an able-bodied person. In cyborg politics discussions, especially regarding body modification and augmentation, gender identity intersects. Transgender experiences may vary from cisgender experiences in the realm of body modification technologies. Gender, race, and class intersect in conversations about reproductive technologies and cyborg politics, influencing access based on socio-economic factors and cultural contexts. An intersectional approach to understanding cyborg politics is vital for promoting inclusivity, recognizing diverse experiences, and addressing technology's potential to reinforce power imbalances. It encourages a thorough analysis considering the complex interplay of various social factors in human-technology interactions.

Critiques of Cyberspace 6.5.2 Critique of Essentialism
Essentialism, a philosophical idea, suggests that certain unchanging qualities define the essence of a category or identity. Despite its influence, essentialism is criticised for oversimplifying and reducing individuals to fixed characteristics, promoting stereotypes, and ignoring diversity within categories. Critics argue that it neglects Intersectionality, which acknowledges individuals' multiple intersecting identities like gender, race, and class. Ignoring these intersections leads to a narrow understanding of identity. Essentialism assumes fixed characteristics, overlooking identities' dynamic nature and potential evolution. This can reinforce biases, perpetuate stereotypes, and result in discrimination. In policymaking, essentialist views may lead to inequitable outcomes by overlooking diverse needs within groups, impacting justice and fairness.
6.6 TECHNOLOGICAL HYBRIDITY
Hybridity, originating in biology and extending to linguistics and racial theory in the 19th century, now finds use across academic disciplines and popular culture. In biology, it signifies blending different species to form new ones, like the mule, the offspring of a donkey and a horse. In social sciences and cultural studies, hybridity denotes merging separate practices or structures to create novel entities. Technological hybridity, relevant in various fields, involves integrating diverse technologies to form unified systems, emphasising the dynamic interaction between technological components. This can occur through hardware-software integration, digital and physical systems convergence, or blending traditional and emerging technologies. In identity and culture, technological hybridity involves integrating technology into the human experience, as seen in Donna Haraway's cyborg concept, symbolising the fusion of organic and technological elements. This blending challenges traditional boundaries, fostering a nuanced understanding of the human-machine relationship. Cultural practices also exhibit technological hybridity, combining traditional and digital forms to create new modes of expression and communication, influencing how individuals interact with their surroundings and construct their identities. Additionally, technological hybridity extends to integrating different technological platforms, forming complex socio-technical systems impacting society in healthcare, entertainment, education, and the workplace.
6.6.1 Integration of Biological and Technological Components
Cyborg technology, a recent scientific breakthrough, propels humanity to new heights by combining machinery with living tissue. Cyborgs possess an inner metallic endoskeleton enveloped in outer living tissue. Originating in 1960, NASA scientists Nathan Kline and Manfred Clynes coined the term "Cyborg" to enhance human survival in extra-terrestrial environments. Cyborgs are categorised into convenient cyborgs, catering to human preferences through exoskeletons, and conditional cyborgs, aiming to replace or repair injured body parts with bionic implants. Distinguishing them from robots, cyborgs integrate with living beings. Cyborg technology includes hearing colour, the Luke arm, visualising light, hand gripping, and artificial eyes, offering prosthetic solutions for touch sensation and daily activities. The scope of cyborg development spans computer-controlled smart limbs, nanomedicine, brain uploading, and invisibility technology. While presenting advantages and disadvantages, the hope is for a quiet technological revolution, elevating humans to the next level.

6.6.2 The Cyborg as a Fusion of Nature and Culture Post-Humanism and
Cyborg Manifesto
The word "cyborg" comes from "cybernetic organism" and represents a blend of nature and culture. Scientists Manfred Clynes and Nathan Kline coined it in the 1960s to describe using technology to enhance human abilities. This idea has evolved and is now explored in science fiction, philosophy, and cultural studies.
Technological Integration with the Human Body
Cyborgs integrate technology into the human body, from basic prosthetics to advanced enhancements like neural implants. This blurs the line between natural and artificial, creating a hybrid entity.
Biotic and Technological Symbiosis
Cyborgs symbolise a symbiotic link between biological and technological elements, enhancing human abilities, addressing disabilities, and extending lifespan. This interplay challenges traditional ideas of pure natural or artificial distinctions.
Cultural Context and Identity
The cyborg concept sparks inquiries about identity and cultural impact as technology integrates into bodies. Questions arise about how these changes influence self- perception, identity, and cultural belonging. Cyborgs challenge norms, urging a reassessment of societal views on body modification and augmentation. The cyborg symbolises the changing connection between nature and culture, challenging what it means to be human. Integrating technology into the body prompts questions about identity, ethics, and the future.
6.6.3 Scope in Cyborg Technological Development
Thanks to technological advancements, neural implants connecting the mind with a computer are now a reality. Examples include cochlear implants for hearing and retinal implants for vision, both with advanced features. Computer-controlled Smart Limbs: Prosthetic technology, like Touch Bionics' I-limb, allows control through a smartphone app and offers advanced features such as rotating thumbs and movable wrists. Future developments may enhance natural limbs with computer-controlled prosthetics. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology is a medical breakthrough that uses tiny particles to target specific body areas. In an experiment for lung cancer, inhaled nanoparticles were sent to affected lung areas. These particles were heated using a magnet outside the body to eliminate diseased cells. Uploading the Brain: Futurist Ray Kurzweil predicts that by 2040 to 2045, humans could upload their consciousness into a computer. Russian billionaire Dmitry Itskov plans to achieve potential immortality by 2045 through brain processing. He envisions using cyborg technology to live in a holographic body, allowing remote operation of different bodies through neural interfaces. Invisibility Technology: Researchers are working on creating a real-life invisibility cloak inspired by Harry Potter. Recent experiments use small antennas to generate an electromagnetic field, cancelling out visible light waves and achieving the cloaking effect.

6.7 CYBORG AND FEMINISM
In cybernetics, feminist concerns revolve around how technology challenges and reshapes traditional views of gender roles. The term "natural," often used to describe specific roles, reflects a worldview implying that these roles are unchangeable. Cybernetics, as advocated by Donna Haraway, challenges and erases gender boundaries that have traditionally confined women to roles dictated by perceived "natural" attributes like weakness or submission. Haraway argues that if the human concept is socially constructed, devoid of inherent "natural" traits, then gender roles are also social constructs. Cybernetics introduces a paradigm where roles aren't determined by sex or race but allow individuals to construct their identities freely. The cyborg, embodying a hybrid of machine and organism, blurs the lines between nature and culture, challenging essentialist views of human nature. This paradigm shift challenges claims about specific social roles based on biological differences between sexes. Haraway's notion of the cyborg advocates for a new feminism that embraces technology's transformative impact on our bodies while rejecting binary thinking perpetuated by patriarchy. In essence, technology becomes a means to erase boundaries between identities, offering a pathway beyond restrictive norms and fostering openness, pluralism, and indefiniteness. Donna Haraway's Cyborg Manifesto critiques patriarchal society while recognizing cybernetics' power to change human relations. She imagines a society built on harmony, not similarity, breaking free from stereotypes. Technology, a tool, erases boundaries between identities. Cyborgs, as hybrids, go beyond gender binaries, promoting openness and allowing individuals to shape their identities beyond norms. Haraway's ideas highlight technology's ability to expand possibilities and empower people. This simplified version aims to make these complex concepts accessible to beginners.
6.7.1 Critique of Traditional Feminism
Examining gender through technologies of embodiment allows for an analysis of how gender operates in our complex world. Despite multiple scholars engaging with gender and embodiment, some fall short by erasing or imposing heavy boundaries around gendered embodiment. Scholars, including Donna Haraway, Judith Butler, Elizabeth Grosz, Robert McRuer, Irene Dankelman, and Chandra Mohanty, highlight how gender and gender technologies shape our understanding. While Haraway and Butler tend to erase physical bodies to subvert normativity, scholars like Grosz, McRuer, Dankelman, and Mohanty delve into gendered embodiment's complexities, localizations, and materialities. They resist oppressive societal norms, ideologies, and practices, emphasising embodiment's resistance and physical aspects. Haraway and Butler, aiming to eliminate normative boundaries, inadvertently overlook the rich complexity of embodiment. In contrast, Grosz, McRuer, Dankelman, and Mohanty underline embodiment's physicality and contingent positionality in society, offering a more nuanced perspective on the intricate nature of gendered experiences.
6.7.2 The Cyborg as a Feminist Figure
Donna Haraway's idea of the cyborg is a revolutionary feminist symbol challenging traditional views of identity, gender, and power dynamics. In her important work

"A Cyborg Manifesto," Haraway introduces the cyborg as a figure breaking down Post-Humanism and
Cyborg Manifesto
dualisms like nature/culture and human/machine, offering a more flexible understanding of identity beyond fixed categories. The cyborg actively rejects fixed qualities assigned to genders, promoting diverse and intersectional feminist perspectives. Haraway sees the cyborg as a symbol of empowerment for women through technology, countering the idea that technology is only oppressive and emphasising its potential to enhance agency and autonomy. Representing a post gender future, the cyborg challenges traditional gender roles, advocating inclusivity in feminism. Through its hybrid nature, the cyborg celebrates the dynamic essence of identity, confronting narratives depicting women as passive victims and emphasising agency. Haraway's cyborg supports an intersectional outlook, recognizing the interconnectedness of gender, race, and class. In Haraway's vision, the cyborg becomes a feminist icon, prompting the exploration of new paradigms for identity, agency, and liberation in the face of advancing technologies.
6.7.3 Gender and Technology in Haraway's Framework
Gender, seen as a flexible identity, is influenced by cultural and socio-economic factors shaped through the social construction of gender and race. In her important essay "A Cyborg Manifesto," Donna Haraway explores the intricate relationship between gender and technology, challenging traditional views. Using the cyborg as a metaphor, she disrupts fixed distinctions between nature, culture, and human- machine dynamics, viewing technology as an empowering tool. Haraway envisions a future that challenges normative gender roles, encouraging diverse feminist discussions. Her work opens paths for redefining gender roles and promoting inclusivity by examining how technology interacts with gender, incorporating race, class, and other social factors.
6.8 CYBORGS IN POPULAR CULTURE
Cyborgs, often shown as body machines in movies and stories, represent the extreme possibilities of human technology. Think of mice with human ears, titanium knee joints, and enhancements for looks, blending science fiction with real-world progress. Cyborgs, short for cybernetic organisms, are a big part of literature, movies, TV, and video games, becoming iconic figures. In these made-up stories, they explore themes like what it means to be human, identity, and how technology affects society. For example, the Terminator character (played by Arnold Schwarzenegger) is a famous cyborg in James Cameron's Terminator movies. It's a robot from the future covered in living tissue, travelling through time to change history. These cultural portrayals dig into how humans and technology interact, making us think about the effects of these advancements on our lives.
6.8.1 Representation of Cyborgs in Film, Literature, and Media
The depiction of cyborgs in literature and film explores the intricate relationship between humanity and technology. This exploration prompts profound reflections on identity, ethics, and the consequences of technological progress. In literature, cyborgs challenge conventional binary concepts by embodying hybridity and fluidity, symbolising a metaphor for challenging dominant power structures and envisioning new forms of identity and social order. Early instances, like Edgar Allan Poe's 1843 short story "The Man That Was Used Up," and the Tin Man in the 1939 classic "The Wizard 107

Critiques of Cyberspace of Oz," represent literary and filmic cyborgs, respectively, embodying transformations that echo numerous narratives exploring the essence of humanity. Cyborgs in Film: From Tin Man to the Winter Soldier Movies like "Ghost in the Shell" (1995 and 2017) and the "Blade Runner" series explore a world where people use cybernetic enhancements. Characters like the Major, a cyborg cop, and replicants in "Blade Runner" deal with questions about identity. In superhero stories, figures like Doctor Octopus and Iron Man have cybernetic upgrades, and the Winter Soldier raises moral dilemmas with a robotic arm. These films continue the legacy of characters like the Tin Man from "The Wizard of Oz," who sought love, acceptance, and purpose. Cyborgs in Literature: Philip K. Dick and Donna Haraway's Influence Philip K. Dick's book "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" inspired "Blade Runner," exploring the boundary between humans and androids and raising questions about empathy and morality. Donna Haraway's non-fiction work, "The Cyborg Manifesto," significantly influences how we think about cyborgs, challenging traditional ideas about gender, identity, and the relationship between humans and machines and promoting a more flexible understanding. Her ideas have influenced discussions across various media, shaping how we talk about cyborgs today.
Cyborgs in Media: Deus Ex and Westworld
The video game series "Deus Ex" explores a cyberpunk world where characters, including protagonist Adam Jensen, are augmented with cybernetic enhancements. These games delve into themes of conspiracy, transhumanism, and the societal impacts of augmentation. In the TV series "Westworld" (2016), inspired by Michael Crichton's film, hosts--androids indistinguishable from humans--narrate a compelling story exploring consciousness, free will, and ethical considerations.
6.8.2 Cultural Impact of Haraway's Cyborg Concept
Culture is how a specific group sees things at a certain time, different from society, which is a group of interacting organisms. Cultures involve learned behaviours, while societies are groups of interacting entities. Cyborg anthropology examines how modern human life mixes human and non-human elements, especially with technology. It studies how humans, in interconnected systems, change their surroundings using technology. Some scholars suggest focusing on cyborgs in anthropology due to big technological changes. Looking at cyborgs through cybernetics, which started with control and communication, now includes various fields like robotics, intelligence, genetics, and neuroscience. This broader view helps us better understand the complex relationship between humans and technology. Cyborg anthropology stands out by keeping up with fast-changing technology, allowing a detailed look at changes over time. It uses the metaphor of a rhizome, a dynamic and adaptable network, to replace static structures. Cyborgs are morally neutral, but how they are used can be very good or harmful. Cyborg anthropologists need to be careful because their studies can impact different groups. This risk is common in anthropology but is more significant in technology-focused fields. In simple terms, cyborg anthropology explores how technology interacts with humanity and culture in a rapidly advancing world.

6.9 RELEVANCE OF THE CYBORG MANIFESTO
Cyborg Manifesto
TODAY
The Manifesto talks about a different way of looking at knowledge. Instead of trying to find one big truth, it suggests having a "knowledge ecology," where many different ideas and truths can coexist without fitting into one idea. At the start, the manifesto wants to change politics by using irony, humour, and playful seriousness instead of sticking to one way of thinking. It aims to replace being overly correct with being ironic, which means accepting differences without forcing everyone to be the same. Throughout history, humans improved by farming, making tools, and creating language. Now, things like artificial organs, smartphones, GPS, and communication tools make us stronger and smarter, helping us go beyond the limits of time and space. This idea of a cyborg isn't just for the future; it's happening now. According to Haraway, being a cyborg doesn't mean having chips or metal parts in you. It's about how technology improves our lives, like living longer or staying fit with exercise machines and special clothes. Cybernetics, which is about how machines and living things work together, is a normal part of our lives. Even how we keep fit is like cybernetics - treating our bodies like machines that can get better over time. Haraway also says the cyborg is both real and imaginary. The Internet and virtual reality affect how we think and feel, creating different identities in online places like games and social media. These identities can be as different as the places they're in.
6.9.1 Contemporary Applications of Haraway's Ideas
Donna Haraway' 'A Cyborg Manifesto' continues to inspire contemporary discussions across various fields due to its insightful reflections on the intersections of technology, society, and identity. It contributes to post-humanist and transhumanist thought discussions, challenging the dualistic distinctions between humans and machines, and emphasising the entanglements between biological and technological systems. In contemporary debates about artificial intelligence, biotechnology, and cybernetics, the cyborg emerges as a potent symbol for exploring the boundaries between humans and non-humans. Contemporary feminists draw on cyborg theory to critique essentialist notions of gender and explore the complexities of identity in the digital age. The cyborg offers a framework for understanding the fluidity of gender, embodiment, and subjectivity in a technologically mediated world. The cyborg's hybridity reflects the complex intersections of race, class, gender, sexuality, and disability. Intersectional activists and scholars draw on cyborg theory to advocate for more inclusive and equitable social and political systems. Contemporary eco-feminists draw on cyborg theory to critique anthropocentrism and to advocate for more sustainable and reciprocal relationships with the natural world.
6.9.2 Challenges and Opportunities
The realm of cyborg interaction has progressed significantly, with cyborgs increasingly integrated into our lives. Cyborg Human Interaction (CHI) is crucial for maximising its potential, focusing on creating seamless interfaces for effective collaboration. Bridging the Communication Gap: CHI faces challenges bridging the communication gap between humans and cyborgs. Developing intelligent interfaces using technologies like natural language processing and neural interfaces is essential. Ensuring Safety and Trust: Safety and trust between humans and cyborgs are paramount. Cybernetic 109

Critiques of Cyberspace safety mechanisms and transparent decision-making processes build trust, ensuring confident interaction. Designing Intuitive User Interfaces: User-friendly interfaces incorporating neural interfaces and augmented reality enhance CHI experiences for users of all technical levels. Collaboration and Task Allocation: Effective collaboration requires understanding human and cyborg capabilities. Dynamic task allocation algorithms optimise productivity and leverage complementary abilities. Empowering Human-Cyborg Partnerships: Cyborgs should augment, not replace, humans. Automating tasks frees humans from higher-level activities, enhancing overall capabilities. Human-cyborg interaction is a frontier with vast potential. Addressing challenges and embracing opportunities can transform industries and improve lives. Let's develop intuitive interfaces, ensure safety, and foster meaningful partnerships. Together, we'll revolutionise cyborg interaction and unlock limitless possibilities. Join the conversation and embrace the future of human-cyborg collaboration. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Highlight the cultural impact of post-humanist and cyborg themes in media
representations.

2. Emphasise the role of these concepts in shaping cultural narratives and challenging
traditional perspectives on identity and humanity.

3. Discuss potential cultural challenges in integrating post-humanist and cyborg
ideas, considering ethical considerations and societal implications.

4. Share your reflections on how cultural histories are transformed and understood
in the context of post-humanism and cyborg concepts.

6.10 LET US SUM UP
Cyborg Manifesto
Post-humanism, a prevailing concept in the late 20th and 21st centuries, intersects human, non-human, and technological domains, gaining prominence amidst environmental concerns. Diverging from transhumanism, it critiques humanist values, embracing a deconstructionist approach. Donna Haraway's Cyborg Manifesto challenges fixed identities, advocating a fluid understanding of gender and human- machine relationships. In media technologies, virtual, social, and augmented reality shape post-human experiences, blurring online and offline realities. Responsive to technological evolution, Cyborg anthropology explores human existence's fusion with technology and its cultural implications. Haraway's cyborg, embodying a fusion of nature and culture, questions gender norms and essentialist views. Cyborg politics, embedded in intersectionality, examines how technology intersects with gender, race, and class, emphasising inclusivity. Technological hybridity blends diverse technologies, influencing identity, culture, and societal systems. Cyborgs in popular culture, from literature to films like "Ghost in the Shell" and "Blade Runner," explore human-technology dynamics and challenge traditional notions. Haraway's cyborg becomes a feminist symbol, challenging fixed gender roles. In essence, post-humanism reshapes human perspectives, emphasising the intricate interplay of technology, identity, and culture in an evolving world. Haraway's cyborg paradigm offers a lens for understanding the transformative potential of technology in shaping humanity's future.
6.11 KEYWORDS
Post-humanism : is a theoretical paradigm challenging foundational assumptions about the human subject in modern Western culture. It emphasises the intersections of humans, non- humans, and technology. Virtual Reality : (VR) immerses users in computer-generated environments, presenting scenes and objects that closely resemble reality. This technology allows users to experience a profound sense of presence in their surroundings. Augmented Reality : Augmented Reality (AR) enriches the real world by integrating computer-generated information, enhancing user experiences. This technology utilises software, applications, and hardware, such as AR glasses, to overlay digital content seamlessly onto physical environments and objects. Digital Dualism : is the belief that the physical world is 'real' and the digital world is 'virtual'. These two worlds are viewed as separate and diverse realities in physical space. A Cyborg Manifesto : In "A Cyborg Manifesto," Haraway delves into the historical dynamics between humans and machines, asserting that pivotal boundaries have been disrupted over time. 111

Critiques of Cyberspace Essentialism : Essentialism is the idea that people and things have 'natural' inherent and unchanging characteristics. Technological Hybridity : Hybrid technology systems integrate multiple technologies to enhance overall efficiency. The goal is to create synergies between different technologies and optimise their functionalities within a unified system.
6.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Ansell Pearson, Keith. "Life Becoming Body: On the 'Meaning' of Post
HumanEvolution." Cultural Values 1, no. 2 (1997a).
2. Benson, Etienne S.. "Post-Domestication: The Posthuman". Handbook of
Historical Animal Studies, edited by Mieke Roscher, Andre Krebber and Brett Mizelle, Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter Oldenbourg, 2021, pp. 53-66. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110536553-006
3. Campbell, Robert A. (2001). "CYBORG SALVATION HISTORY: Donna
Haraway and the Future of Religion". Humboldt Journal of Social Relations.
4. Dalvin, N.. (2023). Limitations of Cyborg feminism in India and Misinterpretation
of feminism in Western Cyborg science fiction movies in the light of Haraway's
The Cyborg Manifesto. International Journal of Humanities and Education
Development (IJHED), 5(3), 1-4. https://doi.org/10.22161/jhed.5.3.1
5. Haraway, Donna. "'Cyborgs, Coyotes, and Dogs: A Kinship of Feminist
Figurations' and 'There are Always More Things Going on Than You Thought! Methodologies as Thinking Technologies'". (2004). The Haraway Reader. Routledge.
6. Braidotti, Rosi. (2013). The post-human. Polity Press.
7. Valeriani, D., & Poli, R. (2019). "Cyborg groups enhance face recognition in
crowded environments": Correction. PLoS ONE, 14(3), Article e0214557. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214557
6.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Post-humanism and cyborg concepts hold profound significance in contemporary
cultural discourse, challenging conventional understandings of humanity and technology. By questioning the boundaries between the organic and the artificial, these concepts provoke critical reflections on identity, embodiment, and the ethics of technological integration. They invite us to reconsider entrenched notions of what it means to be human and how technology shapes our experiences and perceptions of the world.
2. The evolution of cultural representations of cyborgs reflects broader shifts in
societal attitudes toward technology and its relationship with humanity. Initially

portrayed as menacing or alien, cyborgs have gradually been depicted with Post-Humanism and
Cyborg Manifesto
greater nuance and complexity, embodying the ambivalence and fascination that accompany technological advancements. These representations mirror society's evolving understanding of the potential benefits and risks associated with merging human and machine.
3. One compelling instance of a cyborg in popular culture is the character of Major
Motoko Kusanagi from the acclaimed anime and manga series Ghost in the Shell. As a cyborg with a human brain, Kusanagi challenges conventional notions of identity and agency, blurring the lines between human and machine. Her existence prompts profound questions about consciousness, embodiment, and the nature of selfhood, inviting audiences to contemplate the implications of a post-human future.
4. Post-humanism and cyborg concepts serve as fertile ground for exploration in
cultural storytelling and artistic expression, offering rich thematic material for creators to delve into. Through various mediums such as literature, film, and visual art, artists and storytellers explore themes of transhumanism, identity politics, and the ethical implications of technological augmentation. These narratives often highlight the tensions between individuality and conformity, autonomy, and control, inviting audiences to critically engage with the complexities of a technologically mediated world. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Post-humanist and cyborg themes in media reshape cultural norms by blurring
human-machine boundaries, fostering discussions on identity and technology's role in society. Through literature and film, these representations challenge perceptions of what it means to be human, inviting reflection on ethics and societal values amidst technological progress.
2. Post-humanist and cyborg concepts redefine cultural narratives by questioning
traditional notions of identity and humanity. Through media, they explore human- machine interactions, prompting debates on consciousness and societal structures. These narratives encourage inclusivity and empathy, challenging power dynamics and fostering diversity in cultural discourse.
3. Integrating post-humanist and cyborg ideas raises ethical dilemmas and societal
tensions. Concerns about privacy, autonomy, and social justice emerge alongside fears of inequality and discrimination. Ethical discussions spanning disciplines are essential for navigating these challenges and shaping a more equitable future amidst technological advancements.
4. Cultural histories are re-examined through post-humanist and cyborg
lenses, highlighting the impact of technology on human evolution. These perspectives prompt reflections on historical narratives and the preservation of cultural heritage in a digital age. By acknowledging technology's influence, we gain insight into past, present, and future cultural trajectories.

UNIT 7 IDENTITIES AND COMMUNITIES
ONLINE
Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 Online Identities
7.2.1 Features of Identity
7.2.2 Online vs Offline Identities
7.2.3 Online Modes of Representation
7.3 Management of Digital Personas
7.3.1 Online Identity Management
7.3.2 Online Impression Management
7.3.3 Implications and Concerns
7.4 Online Communities
7.4.1 Community Cycle
7.4.2 Features and Purposes
7.4.3 Categories
7.5 Online Participation
7.5.1 Types of Participants
7.5.2 Participation Cycle
7.5.3 Netiquette
7.6 Issues and Concerns
7.7 Let Us Sum Up
7.8 Keywords
7.9 Further Readings
7.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
Do you have an account on any social media platform? How often do you use it to connect with your friends or distant family members? Have you joined any groups or communities? This Unit will open up a familiar world of online identity creation for you, albeit with a more critical approach. From covering online identity generation methods to forming various types of communities, we will discuss how individuals participate in the virtual world. We will also go through a new concept called identity and impression management and discuss its relevance in today's time. By the end of the Unit, you will be well-versed in the etiquette required for functioning in the web world.

Identities and
7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Communities Online
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Identify various features of online and offline identities; Elaborate on identity and image management; Differentiate between multiple types of online communities; and Associate features of the participation cycle pertinent to online communities.
7.2 ONLINE IDENTITIES
You would have an ID Card, an Aadhar card, a voter ID, or an ID card from your school or College. Look at it closely; what does it say? It would contain certain markers of your identity, starting with your name, address, phone number, and, at times, your blood group, social caste, and religion. These markers are a few attributes that define us and make us different from other human beings. These attributes, put together, create our identities. Our identities shape our social interactions and carve out our purpose in the world.
7.2.1 Features of Identity
You have met many individuals in your life and found each one different from others in some unique way. Our identities are also crafted by many factors, from biological to conditioned, or the ones we learn subconsciously. Some traits are acquired over time, while others are influenced by society. We may control or uncontrolled these factors voluntarily. Following are a few of the defining factors of identity formulation:
1. Biological or Genetic factors - Skin, eye and hair colour, height, etc.
2. Conditioned or acquired - Personal characteristics, behavioural patterns,
gender attributes
3. Learnt - Interests and hobbies, values and political beliefs
4. Socio-cultural influences - Cultural background, religious bent, social class
5. Psychological - Self-concept, mental health, emotion management
6. Experiential aspects - life experiences, education & work, relationships
While these factors create our unique identity, they are also instrumental in bonding with other humans. We seek out other human beings who have similar traits as ours.
7.2.2 Online vs Offline Identities
The online world or digital world is the network of websites on the Internet that allows individuals to interact, share information, and engage in social activities. Technology enables and platforms this digital world, which is also known as the 'virtual world' because of its dynamic and transient nature.

Critiques of Cyberspace Online identity is how a person represents themselves on a digital platform. It amalgamates the individual's offline personality and a carefully curated online persona. The offline personality includes the person's values and experiences, while the curated persona is a crafted version designed for a specific context and purpose. There can be many differences between an individual's online and offline personalities. While we cannot choose many aspects of our online personality, the offline persona can be devoid of the information one may not want to include. A few of the factors that can create differences in both types of personalities are:
1. Representation: In the physical world, an individual's offline identity is first
defined by their physical appearance, including the clothes they wear or the body language they acquire. On the other hand, in the online space, usernames, avatars, and profile pictures are the individual's visual representations.
2. Anonymity: On online platforms, a person may choose to have anonymous
or multiple profiles for several reasons and opt out of giving out personal information. On the other hand, in real life, anonymity is not just difficult but impossible.
3. Communication style: Offline spaces thrive on face-to-face communication
between people and include a lot of nonverbal cues such as body language, the intonation of voice, etc. On the other hand, in the case of online communication, one may use text, visuals and multimedia elements to communicate without physical presence. But you would have experienced cases where a text has been unable to convey what you wanted or has been misinterpreted by the reader.
4. Content creation: Offline communication is difficult to keep track of and
replicate again. Think of performing a play again and again for different audience groups. Not only would you get tired, but there would be a lot of differences between the first and the last performances. On the other hand, online communication is archived, and thus, record-keeping is better. We can access videos uploaded on YouTube even after a decade of their existence there. Also, an email sent to an individual and forwarded repeatedly would remain the same.
5. Peer group: In an online setting, an individual's social circle may extend
beyond the boundaries of their classroom or immediate geographical neighbourhood. It becomes easier to keep in touch with childhood friends even after relocating to a different city or initiating interaction with strangers. Offline, one may be unable to keep up with acquaintances due to distance issues. These were a few differences in an individual's online and offline identities. Many issues and concerns arise from them, which will be discussed further in this Unit.
7.2.3 Online Modes of Representation
Online identities are explored using Social Media Platforms on the Internet. Social media platforms are websites that allow users to create their accounts and interact with each other. The accounts may post text-based content, images, or videos to 116 initiate the conversation. You may upload pictures from your birthday party, share

your views on the latest film or post a reel of yourself following the latest trend. Identities and
Communities Online
Other users may react and respond to the content publicly or privately, depending on the platform settings. This can be in the shape of likes and comments. This interaction may be responded to, taking the conversation further. The more popular an individual is, the more traction their profile and content posted gather. This is why celebrities' profiles have more followers than yours or mine. On the other hand, some people have become popular due to their online profiles, attaining the status of Social Media Influencers. Social media platforms offer several tools that help create a unique online identity. A few of these are:
1. Username: A username acts as the individual's name on the digital platform,
albeit self-given. You may choose something as simple as a combination of your initials, date of birth, or characteristics you associate with yourself. Usernames are unique to all profiles.
2. Profile information: The amount of information you give in your profile may
vary, but it helps protect your identity. For example, you may want to mention your political views on the profile or the sports club you are a fan of.
3. Profile picture: This is the first visual identifier of an online identity and usually
appears alongside the username. The choice of picture communicates a lot about the individual. While some may choose to post their images with their family, others post photos of celebrities affirming societal beauty standards. Some may choose to use a professional mugshot, while others may post candid images of themselves looking carefreely away from the camera. In any case, each image speaks a thousand words about the person.
4. Content sharing: As discussed earlier, these profiles become vehicles for
posting content online. In this case, the sort of content you watch, post, and interact with may act as a window into your personality. For example, suppose I post videos of a Korean pop band. In that case, they reflect my music tastes, or if I frequently post pictures from vacations, they may reflect differently on my online identity.
5. Online relationships: Compared to offline spaces, online platforms make it
easy to observe how I interact with my peer group online. The way you may interact with your social circle online, the celebrities you follow, or even the number of followers you have says something about your social popularity. These are a few ways you can carve out your unique online identity. All online activity associated with your profile adds up to your digital footprint. Whether bank transactions or video calling your family, all communication is mere data on the web and open to scrutiny. The pressure to create an online persona and keep posting to the profile may differ from person to person. On the other hand, seeing profiles that garner great reactions may also teach a desire to seek validation. As a result, individuals may feel pressure to post frequently and make their profiles more engaging. Activity - 1List the features of your identity based on the knowledge acquired in this section. Compare and contrast how these features are transferred in your online social media profiles.

Critiques of Cyberspace Check Your Progress: 1
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are the different features of identity?

2. What is the difference between online and offline identities?

7.3 MANAGEMENT OF DIGITAL PERSONAS
As discussed earlier, an individual may have multiple accounts online on various social media platforms. One may use YouTube to watch videos, Quora to access information, Snapchat to share images with friends, and WhatsApp to interact with the family. As all these profiles are curated, one must spend time on each platform to manage their digital persona. This process becomes even more important when one is a public figure and must always be in the limelight.
7.3.1 Online Identity Management
OIM, or online identity management, establishes and maintains an individual's positive online persona. From creating a web presence, posting choice content, and solving problems related to online reputation, online identity management works to improve the quality and quantity of traffic that one's profile gathers. For example, for a politician, an online presence means being accessible; on the other hand, for a sportsperson, an online presence would mean giving a glimpse into his/her fans' lives. It is a complex planned process that needs a systemized approach to building this persona, establishing it across platforms and maintaining cordial relationships with all stakeholders.
7.3.2 Online Impression Management
Online Impression Management is attempting to influence other individuals' perception of themselves in an online space. It includes deliberately choosing the content posted or managing the interactions with others in online public spaces. In today's time, when the most basic human relationships are transacting online, from hiring for a job to looking for a matrimonial match, online personas must cater to the expectations of those who chance upon your profile. Corporations also use Online Impression Management to create a favourable public image. It requires content creation based on different platforms' features and target audiences. Building social capital over the usage of digital platforms, individuals may

post content to appease peer groups, seek validation, or establish themselves as a Identities and
Communities Online
brand. It is an extended arm of Public Relations management; only the scrutiny and limelight in this case is 24*7, 365 days a year, facilitated by social media platforms.
7.3.3 Implications and Concerns
Online identities are nothing, but a set of data generated in online space. This data is curated and archived for easy access. With the entire persona being accessible online, there are also privacy risks due to the possibility of data theft. One may also face negative backlash for voicing opinions different from the mainstream. Individuals with limited technological skills may also struggle to create and maintain this online presence, which is imperative today. The pressure of being distinctly visible online and continuously perceived positively can add a lot of stress. The process requires energy and deliberate thought and can be draining for many people. Constant comparison can also yield low self-esteem and anxiety in individuals. Activity - 2 Create an online profile on a social media platform of your choice. Check what details you require to create it. Fill in these details and explore the platform to find individuals similar to you. You will find that although similar, each profile would have something different from yours.
7.4 ONLINE COMMUNITIES
You might be a part of some family WhatsApp Group, or might be following an influencer on Instagram, or would have subscribed to some YouTube Channel. All these groups are forms of Online Communities. These communities are platforms where individuals or users can gather to interact and engage with each other using digital tools. These users could be united by common interests, peer groups, or involved in similar activities. These groups may be discussion forums or collaborative groups dedicated to specific issues. Like offline groups of people, these online communities are not bound by any geographical boundaries but help bring people from diverse geographical, social, and economic backgrounds together. They bind the individuals together based on their opinions and beliefs. These communities act as a vehicle for knowledge sharing across users' expertise and experience. They also help unite like-minded individuals and sometimes have tools to facilitate collaboration.
7.4.1 Community Cycle
Do you remember Orkut or Myspace? These were among the first Social Media Platforms that became popular in the Indian subcontinent in the early 2000s before being phased out by Facebook. Then came Instagram, and now Snapchat is leading the market share. It will inevitably be replaced by some other platform in a few months. One common thing to all of these is that they followed a similar trajectory from inception to decline. Being a dynamic body, online communities display different characteristics at different times of evolution. This trajectory is known as the community lifecycle. Some of these life cycles are steep, resulting in a quick rise and fall, and some are more gradual in their approach.

Critiques of Cyberspace The cycle can be broken down into five stages:
1. Acquisition--At this stage, the community identifies and invites potential
members. These members are identified based on the community's goals and purpose. Members may be invited individually through mailing lists or advertising on different media platforms.
2. Onboarding - This is the introductory stage of the community, where users
are introduced to its features and encouraged to explore the tools to get the most out of the community.
3. Engagement and retention--At this stage, the focus is on how to keep users
engaged by introducing new features or starting more meaningful conversations. Constant engagement is necessary to make users come back again and again to the experience.
4. Departure--Despite trying to retain users, there will come a time when
they want to leave the community. At this time, community managers can do two things: first, learn why the users are departing, and second, evaluate and upgrade the community's goals to retain the departing batch.
5. Reactivation--A community can be reactivated in two scenarios: if the goals
and pursuits are upgraded or altered or the target audience is changed. Very few communities can reactivate themselves without changing anything major about them. If this stage is successfully crossed, the community returns to the first stage, the acquisition stage.
7.4.2 Features and Purposes
A few of the common features of these communities are as follows:
1. User profile: All members have individual user profiles that differentiate them
from each other. Text-based handles or image-based profile pictures can denote these profiles. Online platforms also allow users to create and maintain anonymous profiles.
2. Discussion threads: These are usually comments on content posted by users
listed chronologically. Many platforms also have the option of disabling these comments. These threads allow users to start a discussion on the post. Most of the time, these communities also have space for private one-to- one conversations, known as Chat Box or Direct Messenger.
3. Moderation: These communities also have moderators who govern the
content shared in public space. These moderators ensure that the interaction remains respectful and does not breach any laws online. These communities help in information and knowledge exchange. One may also professionally network on these platforms for project collaboration and management. At times, these communities also act to support and empower certain groups. Few communities work as a marketplace to sell products and, at times, for entertainment.
7.4.3 Categories
The online platforms facilitating these communities have been advancing with the advent of technology. Many communities range from discussion forums, such as

Reddit or Quora, to social media groups, such as LinkedIn Groups or WhatsApp Identities and
Communities Online
groups. Then there are Niche communities, such as Good Reads for book enthusiasts and IMDB or Internet Movie Database for film buffs. A few gaming communities where players worldwide join to play together have also enabled voice calling to discuss strategies live. Lastly, these platforms can also be divided by content. For example, YouTube and Vimeo are video-sharing platforms, while Instagram and Snapchat are images and short video-based platforms. On the other hand, Blogspot is a text-based platform. Online communities allow individuals to bond, express and engage with each other like offline communities, albeit with the help of digital tools. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is OIM or Online Identity Management?

2. What are the different types of online communities?

Activity : 3 Join an online community based on a hobby you have. It could be a Facebook group or a Reddit thread. Observe the communication within the community. Check how the digital tools offered by the platform enable this conversation. Also, try to check the platform's Moderation policy. Lastly, compare it with a classroom and ponder how it differs from an offline learning space.
7.5 ONLINE PARTICIPATION
As discussed in the previous section, there is a considerable difference between online and offline communities. Thus, the participation would also differ comparatively. While serving as a social gathering, online communities offer the participants various levels or degrees of participation without discrimination. The digital tools also enable customization of the experience, making it unique for each user. There are two main types of participation in online communities: Public participation and Private participation. Public participants are openly vocal about their opinions and post in public spaces regularly. They actively interact with the content and increase the traffic on the posts. On the other hand, the private participants are passive in their interaction. They would silently gather the information and would selectively react to the content. They may also communicate with other users by contacting

Critiques of Cyberspace them on personal chat boxes, if at all. Due to its discrete nature, private participation is also known as lurking. Lurking allows users to observe and learn from the community without communicating.
7.5.1 Types of Participants
All online communities have set roles for the users or participants. These roles are like those involved in establishing offline communities. These can be listed as follows:
1. Community Architect: This is the first and foremost user who envisions a
goal and builds a community around it, using digital tools in the case of an online community. Think of Mark Zuckerberg, who designed and programmed Facebook.
2. Manager: This is the second most important user. He runs the community
and sets the rules and guidelines for better functioning.
3. Flag Bearers: These are the members who are invited to join first and act
as the user ambassadors or endorsers of the community. Usually, celebrities or people of public standing act as opinion leaders.
4. Content creators: These members join to create content for the community
and increase the platform's traffic. If the community is public, they are the users responsible for attracting advertisers.
5. Lurkers: As discussed earlier in this section, lurkers are the users who feed
on the existing content and increase the advertising numbers.
6. Researchers: Lastly, a small group of users have joined the community to
study the conversation and the platform for various purposes, ranging from technology to assessing marketing avenues. These six broad categories also have subcategories and overlap, but they comprehensively summarize the virtual population of digital communities.
7.5.2 Participation Cycle
The interest of the users may ebb, and rise based on multiple factors. And that affects their participation style in these online communities. A pattern can be observed in the participation style of the user, in which they cross five of the following stages: Peripheral or Lurker--The participants begin by entering and observing the content and community practices. If comfortable, they become regulars. Inbound or Novice - Regular visitors start engaging with the community and begin with their attempts at content creation. Insider or Regular: After their content attracts traction, the users become more confident and experiment with their content-making styles. The community becomes a major part of their day. Boundary or Leader - An experienced content creator may start collaborating with other content creators or monetizing their presence. By this time, the user has emerged as an opinion leader for the community.

Outbound or Elder--The users are preparing to leave the community at Identities and
Communities Online
this stage. They would have extracted the maximum benefit from it and evolved as people. However, they may not have time to maintain a presence in the community.
7.5.3 Netiquette
All the communities create a code of conduct or rules to run effectively. A word made by joining 'net' and 'etiquette, these rules are necessary to facilitate interaction using technology. Although applicable to all forms of communication, be it over email or writing blogs, netiquette defines acceptable behaviour online. A few golden rules are:
1. Be polite and kind to all the participants, even when disagreeing with their
opinions.
2. Be aware of other's privacy, and make sure you never give out information
about others.
3. Check facts before posting anything. The Internet makes background checks
easy, and misinformation has spread faster than correct information.
4. Respond to messages regularly.
5. Update your online profile regularly with the latest information.
6. Language skills - Proper language and grammar are a basic need when
communicating online. Using a lot of emojis, all capitals, or without spelling checks, are looked down upon.
7. Avoid trolling, spamming and cyber bullies.
8. Report anything that you feel is not abiding by the guidelines.
While the rules are not very different from those offline, one needs to stay alert to stay safe despite the promises of anonymity in virtual space. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are the different stages of the participation cycle?

2. What is netiquette? Why do we need to learn it?

7.6 ISSUES AND CONCERNS
The virtual world offers multiple platforms and avenues to facilitate communication. However, online spaces also address several issues and concerns, such as offline spaces. And like the offline space, these issues also affect an individual's mental health. First and foremost, the raging concern is Cyberbullying and online harassment. The aggregation of individuals voicing their opinions in public spaces always leads to the side-tracking of alternate viewpoints by those in the mainstream. When encountering individuals from diverse backgrounds, one needs to respect their diversity and adopt an approach of inclusivity in all communication. Some communities where online harassment is not monitored may experience negativity and toxicity. Another major concern is the spread of misinformation and fake news over these platforms. In the era of information spreading at a click, one must be very careful while passing information. One may also become a victim of an online scam if not vigilant. While most of the issues can be addressed by effective moderation and community leadership, every user has a responsibility and must be vigilant to keep the communities safe for everyone. Lastly, addiction in these communities may lead to psychological issues within individuals, resulting in ill effects on their mental as well as physical health.
7.7 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, you learnt the features of online identities and discovered how they are represented online. You also explored the concepts of online identity and impression management and learned their applications in today's era. You also encountered various online communities and overlooked the steps of their participation cycle. Lastly, you were taken through the issues and concerns arising from individuals' online presence and the importance of following etiquette relevant to the digital world.
7.8 KEYWORDS
Attribute : A factor associated with an individual that can act as an identifier. For example, Date of birth. Authentication : verification of attributes associated with the individual through a process Biometrics : Information related to the persona of an individual. E.g., height. Digital identity : A set of attributes associated with an entity in the online sphere. Facial recognition : is a set of digital tools that can identify a human face and technology determine whether that face is present in an image. KYC (Know Your : a process through which companies gather data related to
124 Customer) their customers.

NFC (Near Field : A method of wireless communication between devices. Identities and
Communities Online
Communication) OCR (Optical : A tool to identify text from an image Character Recognition) OIM (Online : OIM or Online Identity Management is establishing and Identity maintaining an individual's positive online persona. Management) Influencers : A person who is regarded as an expert in their field and has a considerable following.
7.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Cover, R. (2015). Digital identities: Creating and communicating the online
self. Academic Press.
2. Kannen, V., & Langille, A. (Eds.). (2023). Virtual Identities and Digital
Culture. Taylor & Francis.
3. Kraut, R. E., & Resnick, P. (2012). Building successful online communities:
Evidence-based social design. MIT Press.
4. Marwick, A. E. (2013). Online identity. A companion to new media dynamics,
355-364.5. Peachey, A., & Childs, M. (Eds.). (2011). Reinventing ourselves:
Contemporary concepts of identity in virtual worlds. Springer Science & Business Media.
7.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Different features of identity are:
- Biological or Genetic factors - Skin, eye and hair colour, height, etc.
- Conditioned - Personal characteristics, behavioural patterns, gender attributes
- Learnt - Interests and hobbies, values, and political beliefs.
- Socio-cultural influences - Cultural background, religious bent, social class
- Psychological - Self-concept, mental health, emotion management
- Experiential aspects - life experiences, education & work, relationships
2. Online identity is the way a person represents themselves on a digital platform.
Online identities are an amalgamation of the offline personality of the individual and a curated online persona. The offline personality includes the values and experiences of the person, while the curated persona is the carefully crafted version designed for specific contexts.

Critiques of Cyberspace Check Your Progress: 2
1. OIM, or Online Image Management, establishes and maintains an individual's
positive online persona. It is a complex process that requires a systemized approach to building this persona, establishing it across platforms, and maintaining cordial relationships with all stakeholders.
2. There are many types of communities, ranging from discussion forums to niche
communities to gaming communities. These platforms can also be divided by content. For example, YouTube and Vimeo are video-sharing platforms, while Instagram and Snapchat are image- and short-video-based platforms. On the other hand, Blogspot is a text-based platform. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Different stages of the participation cycle are:
Peripheral or Lurker
Inbound or Novice
Insider or Regular
Boundary or Leader
Outbound or Elder
2. Netiquette is a word made by joining 'net' and 'etiquette. 'It refers to rules
necessary to facilitate interaction using technology. Although applicable to all forms of communication, be it email or blogging, netiquette defines acceptable behaviour online.

Identities and
UNIT 8 POP CULTURE AND ONLINE
Communities Online
EXPRESSION
Structure
8.0 Introduction
8.1 Learning Outcomes
8.2 Understanding Pop Culture
8.2.1 Pop Culture as Mass Culture
8.2.2 High Culture
8.2.3 Low Culture
8.2.4 Mass Culture
8.3 Rise of Pop Culture
8.3.1 Cultural Values and Pop Culture
8.3.2 Consumption of Pop Culture
8.3.3 Pop Culture as Mass Expression
8.3.4 Digital Media and Pop Culture
8.4 Digital Media
8.4.1 Rise of Digital Media
8.4.2 Popularity of Online and Social Media
8.4.3 Cultural Convergence
8.5 What is Online Expression?
8.5.1 Creation
8.5.2 Consumption
8.6 Types of Online Expression
8.6.1 Blog
8.6.2 Vlog
8.6.3 Social Media Posts
8.6.4 Reels
8.6.5 Web Journal
8.6.6 Podcasting
8.6.7 Web Radio
8.6.8 Web TV
8.7 Some Concerns
8.7.1 Real vs Virtual
8.7.2 Privacy issues
8.7.3 Fakes: fake news, deep fake
8.7.4 Trolls
8.7.5 Cyber Bullying
8.7.6 Identity Theft
8.7.8 Freedom of expression or toxic 127

Critiques of Cyberspace 8.8 Let Us Sum Up
8.9 Keywords
8.10 Further Readings
8.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.0 INTRODUCTION
Pop culture is discussed much, but do we know what it means? Pop culture refers to a culture aimed at the younger generation and transmitted through the mass media. Popular culture is a set of beliefs, values, actions, objects, or goods and practices that are popular at any given time and space. It refers to things like art, literature, fashion, dance, film, television, magazines, and ways of living. "Popular culture is intimately connected with education, mass communication, production, and a society's ability to access knowledge" (Campbell). This Unit will discuss different aspects of popular culture and online expression. In doing so, we would define different terms related to culture (pop culture, mass culture, high culture, and low culture). Further, we will describe the rise of pop culture. In doing so, we will discuss the concepts of cultural values and pop culture, consumption of pop culture, pop culture as mass expression, digital media, and pop culture. We would also describe the rise of digital media and its popularity leading to cultural convergence. In this Unit, we will also define online expression and its concept of creation and consumption (prosumers). We would differentiate between different types of online expression. We would also analyse different concerns related to online expression, viz., Real vs Virtual, Privacy Issues, fake news, deep fake, Trolls, Cyber Bullying, Identity Theft and Freedom of expression or toxic. Broadly, all these topics will be discussed to provide a better understanding of popular culture and online expression.
8.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Define different terms related to culture (like Pop Culture, Mass Culture,
High Culture, Low Culture);
Describe the rise of pop culture. In doing so, discuss the Cultural Values and Pop Culture, Consumption of Pop Culture, Pop Culture as Mass
Expression, Digital Media, and Pop Culture;
Describe the rise of digital media and its popularity leading to cultural convergence; Define online expression and its concept of creation and consumption (prosumers); Differentiate between different types of online expression; and Analyse different concerns related to online expression (viz., Real vs Virtual, Privacy Issues, fake news, deep fake, Trolls, Cyber Bullying, Identity Theft and Freedom of expression or toxic).

Pop Culture and Online
8.2 UNDERSTANDING POP CULTURE
Expression Popular culture has different meanings based on its varied definitions in different contexts. Generally, it is recognised as the people's culture predominating in a society at a given time. Barry Brummett (1991) explains that pop culture involves the aspects of social life most actively involved by the public. As the 'culture of the people', popular culture is determined by the interactions between people in everyday activities: styles of dress, slang, greeting rituals and the foods people eat are all examples of popular culture. The mass media also inform popular culture. Popular culture encompasses the most immediate and contemporary aspects of our lives, subject to rapid change in the present highly technological world where people come closer in a global village due to media. Because of its commonality, pop culture reflects and influences people's everyday lives. Also, brands like Nike, Adidas, Maggie, and Amul can attain iconic status in pop. Source: Adobe Stock, https://stock.adobe.com/search?k=%22pop+culture%22 "Popular culture consists of the aspects of attitudes, behaviours, beliefs, customs, and tastes that define the people of any society. So, in the historical term, one can say that popular culture is the culture of the people." (Ray Browne, in his essay 'Folklore to Populore') Thus, popular culture may be defined as the products and forms of expression and identity that are frequently encountered or widely accepted, commonly liked, or approved, and characteristic of a particular society at a given time. Popular culture is a lens to view other cultural groups (Martin & Nakayama,
2011) . Popular culture helps people learn about other cultures, reaffirm their identities,
and reinforce stereotypes. One can sort the world into regions based on cultural attributes. We can also sort the material artefacts of culture into three general attribute areas: popular, high, and folk culture. Pop culture is a phenomenon in which many people in different places adopt the same or similar cultural practices due to globalisation. Seemingly timeless yet elite aristocratic expressions of culture are known as high culture. From an intercultural communication perspective, popular culture is usually our first exposure to other cultures.

Critiques of Cyberspace We can also see that pop culture has several positive impacts on our society: Promotion of Unity in Diversity: Pop culture celebrates diversity, breaks down stereotypes, and promotes inclusivity. Through various forms of media, pop culture showcases characters and stories from different backgrounds, encouraging tolerance and understanding among different groups. Social Awareness: Pop culture raises awareness regarding relevant social issues. TV shows, movies, and music often address topics like discrimination, mental health, and environmental concerns. It sparks discussion and encourages positive change. Inspiration and Aspiration: Pop culture inspires individuals to pursue their passions and dreams. When one sees successful people in the entertainment industry or other fields, it can motivate them to strive for success and personal growth. Community Building: Pop culture provides a sense of community and belongingness. Fan communities are formed around popular books, movies, TV series, and video games. This allows people to connect, share their interests, and build supportive networks. Creativity and Innovation: Pop culture encourages creativity and innovation. It inspires artists, writers, musicians, and designers to create new works and push the boundaries. Economic Growth: The entertainment industry contributes to economic growth by providing jobs, tourism, and revenue. It supports countless careers in different creative and technical fields. Cultural Exchange: Pop culture fosters cultural exchange. It allows people from different cultures to learn and appreciate each other's traditions, customs, and art forms. Entertainment and Stress Relief: Pop culture serves as a source of entertainment and relieves stress. It provides an escape from the demands and pressures of everyday life, offering comfort and relaxation. Charitable Initiatives: Celebrities mostly use their popularity to support charitable causes, raising funds and awareness for various social issues. Education and Learning: Educational programmes and documentaries inspired by pop culture can make learning engaging and more accessible.
8.2.1 Pop Culture as Mass Culture
The concept of culture as something that can be manufactured and consumed at a mass level comes from the modern industrial society. The capitalist interest in having economic gains drives the process of cultural production and signification. Thus, cultural artefacts and phenomena of this sort are described as 'mass culture'. This culture is perceived to have negative connotations of assembly-line uniformity and lack of originality, taste, and refinement, which is considered a mark of true culture. So, popular culture has a huge appeal and connects many people to one unified cultural identity.

The distinction between popular and mass culture is of recent origin. This distinction Pop Culture and Online Expression comes from the assumption that the mass-scale production, distribution, and consumption of cultural commodities/artefacts in industrial societies turn the audience into passive targets. Horkheimer and Adorno brought up the concept of 'culture industry'. In the culture industry, culture is defined as a universal homogenised product based on public preference to make economic gains. In this kind of construct of cultural signification, it is seen that there is almost no room for any individual or collective role or agency as it is assumed that the audience is the unquestioning recipient of the industrially pre-determined meanings attached to the commodities. From this perspective, 'culture' in an industrial society means whatever the owners of the means of production assign a meaning to it. So, it is clear that the notion of mass culture is producer-centric. It does not refer to consumers integrating cultural commodities into their lives in different ways and contexts. This integration often deviates from its intended meaning. Pop culture, also known as Low culture, is described as commercially successful, self-sustaining, and self-perpetuating (Stott, 2004). One such example is social media's video challenges and reel culture. In pop culture, there is always an urge to look for "new" news. This news often comes from previous generations, other cultures, or folk cultures and is often considered an unintentional revolutionary. Pop culture originated during the late 18th-century American Industrial Revolution. During this time, rural people migrated to big cities in large numbers (McAdams,
2014) . This made the cities densely populated, and news of cultural items spread
rapidly. The mass production and the rise of the middle class made consumption of cultural items less expensive. After World War II, innovations in mass media technology led to significant cultural and social changes. This mass media broadcasts about the cultural products/artefacts accessible to all. Pop culture celebrates the people who experience it.
8.2.2 High Culture
Learners, when we talk about High Culture, it is not meant for mass consumption. It is not even easily available to everyone. Consumers of high culture need training or education to appreciate its benefits fully. It is also seen that consumers of high culture would have to purchase costly equipment and memberships to participate in their activities. Thus, the high culture belongs to social or economic elites. It does not move into the realm of the masses. In Western society, examples of high culture could be opera, ballet, classical music, an appreciation of fine wine, or horse polo matches. This is a "sophisticated" taste. In Indian society, one can consider classical music, dance, old paintings, sculpture, and classical drama/theatre. The items of high culture seldom cross over to pop culture. Many times, popular culture is looked down upon. It is Source: PNG Wing, https:// considered superficial and cheap compared to the www.pngwing.com/en/free- sophistication of high culture. png-vuwou

Source: iStock, https://www.istockphoto.com/vector/vienna-court-opera- giovanni-varrone-court-opera-gm1411809750-461484496
8.2.3 Low Culture
Low Culture refers to the masses' habits, tastes, hobbies, and interests. It contrasts with high culture, which, as discussed above, is the culture of the upper-class elite. The terms 'low culture' and 'lowbrow' are derogatory. These terms highlight the lack of sophistication and the tastes of people who are not elite. Low culture examples come from food, entertainment, sports, and shopping. It includes fast food, football/ cricket culture, cheap beverages/ cold drinks, fast fashion, and trashy television content. Source: 123RF, https://www.123rf.com/photo_17148800_abstract-word-cloud- for-low-culture-with-related-tags-and-terms.html
8.2.4 Mass Culture
Under Mass Culture come the widely consumed cultural products and practices disseminated through mass media. John Storey (1994) defines mass culture as "culture produced for, by, and within the institutions of mass society: the media, the entertainment industries, and the education system" One can see that this definition highlights the industrial production and widespread distribution of cultural products. Toby Miller (2008) emphasises the audience aspect, viewing mass culture as "a range of cultural products that are produced for a relatively large and undifferentiated audience".

In the Indian context, mass culture transcends regional and social divides. Let us Pop Culture and Online Expression take the example of Bollywood films. These films, with their elaborate song-and- dance routines, melodramatic storylines, and larger-than-life characters, epitomise mass culture's appeal to a broad audience (Nicholas, 1990). Similarly, the rise of reality TV shows and social media trends often transcend regional and social barriers; it creates a shared cultural experience for millions of Indians. However, the dominance of mass culture raises concerns about the potential homogenisation of diverse regional art forms. Also, the influence of Western media leads to questions of cultural imperialism (Appadurai, 2000). Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Define Popular Culture.

8.3 RISE OF POP CULTURE
Learners, let us discuss the rise of popular culture. When one examines human history, one can observe that the masses were influenced by dogmatic rules and traditions dictated by local folk culture. Most people were spread throughout small cities and rural areas. With the beginning of the Industrial Revolution (late eighteenth century), rural people began to migrate to cities, leading to the urbanisation of most Western societies. Urbanisation is a necessary element in the formation of popular culture. People who were earlier living in homogeneous small villages found themselves in crowded cities with great cultural diversity. These diverse people would see themselves as a 'collectivity' resulting from common or popular forms of expression. So, many scholars trace the beginning of the popular culture phenomenon to the rise of the middle class brought on by the Industrial Revolution. With the mass production of Industrialization also came: The developments in transportation (steam locomotive and the steamship); Advancements in building technology; Increased literacy; Improvements in education and public health, and The emergence of efficient forms of commercial printing (ex, the penny press, magazines, and pamphlets). This began the mass media revolution. All the above factors contributed to the development of popular culture. By the start of the twentieth century, the print industry mass-produced content for consumption. The print industry includes illustrated newspapers and periodicals,

Critiques of Cyberspace serialised novels, and detective stories. The ideas expressed in print media provided a starting point for popular discourse on different topics. Films, broadcast radio, television, and digital media profoundly influenced culture. We can conclude that industrialisation, urbanisation, the mass media, and the continuous growth in technology since the Industrial Revolution have contributed to the formation of popular culture.
8.3.1 Cultural Values and Pop Culture
Learners, let us discuss how cultural values and pop culture are related. Exposure to popular culture leads to the formation of certain cultural values. What cultural values are promoted through popular culture products, and how do they shape a society's value system? Let us discuss the impact of pop culture in shaping experience, learning, value systems, and decisions through specific research. Daniel and Musgrave (2017) illustrate that the "synthetic experiences" of pop culture and social media (films, novels, television, video games) can change beliefs, reinforce pre-existing views, or even displace knowledge gained through more traditional ways of learning about other cultures. Forex, Tom Clancy's book influenced US relations with the Soviet Union and 9/11. Abdullah (2019) studied the correlation between the willingness to learn English and exposure to pop culture and social media. The correlation was high, so the author encouraged teachers to allocate as much time as possible to using pop culture to help students learn English. Chen Guo Ming (2012) states that pop culture and social media "not only influence the form and content of information/messages, but they also affect how people understand each other in the process of human communication, especially for those from different cultural or ethnic groups." He explores changes in e- communication, cultural identity, intercultural relationships, adaptation, and intercultural conflict.
8.3.2 Consumption of Pop Culture
People negotiate their relationship with pop culture in interesting and complex ways. People resist and actively consume popular culture to maintain or reshape their identities. Individuals also feel they should participate if a social group participates in any form of pop culture. Moreover, if a social group shows concern about pop culture, individuals will refuse to engage with that form. The phenomenon mentioned above can be seen in the case of Facebook. As per Statista.com (2019), seventy-nine (79 %) per cent of 18-49-year-olds in the United States used Facebook, while only forty per cent (40%) of the 65 and older age group were using the same. According to the Pew Research Center (2019), 18-24-year-olds embrace a variety of platforms (YouTube 94%, Snapchat 78%, Instagram 71%, and Twitter 45%) by visiting those platforms multiple times (71%) in a day. Thus, popular culture does not need to win over the majority to be considered 'popular.' With the usage of approximately one-fourth of the global population, Meta (Facebook) can be considered one of the epitomes of pop culture.

Kathryn Sorrells (2013) has put three ways which can make a person informed Pop Culture and Online Expression consumers of popular culture. i. First, people should increase their awareness of the role of the media in forming views, normalising ideas, and spreading stereotypes. ii. Second, we need to understand that there is a choice in what media we consume and what we do not. iii. Third, there is no need to accept everything that mass media promotes. So, an aware consumer would use these cultural products for their benefit rather than becoming a crash representative of this culture.
8.3.3 Pop Culture as Mass Expression
Pop Culture influences mass expression, whether social, political, economic, or cultural. Through this pop culture, the tastes, likes and dislikes of the masses are expressed. This can take the form of adopting a new cultural artefact, raising a voice in favour of or against an issue, or organising online social or political activism. The centrality of social media as a space for self-expression and identity negotiation for young people (Boyd, 2014) allows for the study of youth social and political expression. Social media provides a distinct view into youth (political) expression in naturally occurring contexts, where young people interact according to their preferred way of expression. Jenkins et al. (2016) reveal that youth activist groups aimed to achieve change "by any media necessary," while heavily relying on references and content from popular culture. Jenkins et al. (2016) introduced the term "civic imagination". This term describes the ways young people employ popular culture and imaginary worlds as they "identify and frame political issues in language that speaks to themselves and their peers." Popular culture references are particularly important for young people who are not yet politically engaged but rather are negotiating their relationship to the political realm (Kligler-Vilenchik, 2016). Social media provides a platform for "collective political expression" for youth. It allows them to deliberately connect to an assumed like-minded audience through shared symbolic resources (Literat & Kligler-Vilenchik, 2019). The collective mass (social, political, cultural) expression is a hybrid between interpersonal communication (with known people) and broadcasting the content to a large (unknown) audience. In working towards a collective political expression, youth communicate with an imagined audience (Litt & Hargittai, 2016). The youth may imagine their audience as similar or dissimilar to themselves, socially, politically, culturally and in terms of other variables (age, gender, interests, etc.). Popular culture plays a role in the potential bridge by bringing together socially, politically, economically, and culturally heterogeneous audiences. It also provides shared symbolic resources for collective political expression (Kligler-Vilenchik & Literat, 2018; Literat & Kligler-Vilenchik, 2018, 2019). Thus, popular culture becomes a means for mass expression on issues of common interest to the masses.
8.3.4 Digital Media and Pop Culture
In the present times, digital media has become an undeniable force in shaping and disseminating popular culture. This convergence transcends traditional media channels 135

Critiques of Cyberspace and fosters a participatory and interactive environment. Social media allow for the rapid spread of memes, viral trends, and fan communities dedicated to specific pop culture phenomena. Content creators use platforms like Instagram, Facebook, WhatsApp Channels, YouTube and TikTok to showcase their talents and achieve viral fame. This blurs the line between professional production and amateur creativity. Also, digital media empowers consumers to become active participants, engaging with content through comments, reactions, and discussions, fostering a sense of community and influencing the evolution of pop culture trends. This dynamic interplay between creation, consumption, and interaction has redefined the landscape of popular culture in the digital age. In the social media age, we can get an immediate response to any trend or pop culture event. The audience has the power to shun a trend or make it relevant. Social media has also been instrumental in reviving a pop culture trend from the 1950s and amplifying its presence in present times. At the same time, mass consumption has also shortened a trend's shelf life. In pursuing a celeb's style, we also look like their copy and lose our originality. Email and text messages are increasingly used to directly transmit information about vital news events. Barack Obama announced his selection of Joe Biden as his vice- presidential running mate in the 2008 election via text message to 2.9 million people. Due to all these, the Internet has become a pop culture force. It is a source of amateur talent and amateur promotion. However, traditional media outlets still maintain much control and influence over pop culture. Many singers or writers who first make their mark on the Internet quickly transition to traditional media and new media stars are quickly absorbed into the old media landscape. The Internet and social media allow little-known individuals to reach a huge audience through their art, opinions, or creations. It allows content creators to reach fans directly. The established pop culture/mass media circles turned down many examples of projects and became hit through digital media. Daniel Suarez and Amish Tripathi became famous as writers through social media. These are fascinating times as they allow everyone to participate in this pop culture as a consumer and creator. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Write three ways which can make a person informed consumer of popular
culture.

8.4 DIGITAL MEDIA
The 21st century has significantly changed how humans communicate, share information, and consume entertainment. This transformation has happened due to

the rise of digital media. Digital media is a vast and ever-evolving domain that Pop Culture and Online Expression encompasses text, images, audio, video, and interactive experiences. This digital revolution reached its height with the rise of online and social media platforms, which are altering the social connections of the world. Source: Flaticon, https://www.flaticon.com/free-icon/social-media_902765
8.4.1 Rise of Digital Media
The invention of the Internet can be attributed to the beginning of digital Media. As a global network of interconnected computers, the Internet laid the groundwork for disseminating digital content on a large scale. Significant computing devices turning into small smartphones/ watches and tablets further advanced the digital media revolution. These portable devices allow users to access and create content anywhere and anytime. Also, the lower technology prices and the huge growth in storage capacity revolutionised the whole digital media and online communication scenario. All these developments created a fertile ground for the emergence of online and social media platforms. The online and social media platforms made the concept of the information age and the global village a reality. The geographical barriers became virtual non- entities, and people could share information and ideas effortlessly in real-time. As discussed above, the ability to create and share user-generated content (blog posts, photographs, videos, or even music) empowered individuals to become active participants in the digital landscape. Due to social media platforms, there is a constant stream of entertainment content, news feeds, funny videos, and live broadcasts. These contents captivated users and fostered a sense of endless engagement. Learners, let us briefly discuss key points of how digital media developed and rose to its present-day stature. The seeds of digital media were sown in the 1960s and 1970s. The invention of mainframe computers and the initial Internet, pioneered by projects like ARPANET, laid the foundation for the interconnected exchange of digital information. In the 1970s and 1980s, personal computing began with the Apple II. This machine empowered individuals to create and share information through rudimentary forms of digital communication, such as Bulletin Board Systems (BBS). However, the real development of the Internet happened with the arrival of the World Wide Web in the 1990s. The web browsers (Mosaic and Netscape) made accessing online information more user-friendly. Also, email became the initial communication tool of the present digital age.

Critiques of Cyberspace This digital revolution accelerated in the 2000s. Broadband Internet has become affordable in an era of hyper-connectivity, and smartphones have become ubiquitous. Social media platforms, with pioneers like Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter, redefined how we connect, share, and consume information. Today, as we navigate the 2020s, Artificial Intelligence, Virtual Reality (VR), and Augmented Reality (AR) are emerging as the next frontiers of digital media, blurring the lines between the physical and virtual worlds. In India, digital media rose almost simultaneously with the world. India's first computer centre was established in the 1960s. In 1975, the Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) was launched. In the late 1990s, Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited, India's first Internet service provider, brought the dial-up Internet. In the 2000s, the real digital boom happened in India. Internet penetration increased, and the costs of mobile phones declined. Social media platforms fostered digital communities. The mobile-first Internet era came with Reliance Jio's 4G services launch in 2016. WhatsApp, Instagram, and Twitter have changed all online interactions. Indian government launched the "Digital India" programme to bridge the digital divide and empower citizens. Artificial intelligence, Big Data, and the rise of indigenous social media platforms like ShareChat and Chingari are shaping the future of India's digital landscape.
8.4.2 Popularity of Online and Social Media
Social media is a major element of Internet culture, significantly impacting our interactions. For instance, reel-making and video challenges are necessary pastimes of Internet users. Social media helps nurture how we communicate online, which differs from how we communicate in face-to-face conversations. Sentences can take on different shades of meaning, depending on grammar. Several factors contributed to the phenomenal popularity of online and social media. Convenience is the supreme reason for its growth. These platforms are readily accessible on any connected device, a significant advantage in our fast-paced world. Interactivity and engagement are other aspects which make this medium popular. The users can actively participate through comments, shares, and discussions and develop a sense of community/ belonging with others with similar interests. The constant influx of updates and information keeps users engaged and informed. This creates a Fear Of Missing Out (FOMO) that fuels the continued participation of the users. Recent data from Datareportal (January 2024) reveals that over half of the world's population (62.3%) now uses social media. This translates to a staggering 5.04 billion people actively engaging with these platforms. India also reflects this global trend. According to Forbes Advisor (2023), social media penetration in India has reached
33.4%, with 40.2% of the population aged 18 and above actively using social
networks. Instagram is the most popular platform in India, with a user base exceeding
516.92 million.
8.4.3 Cultural Convergence
Learners first need to understand what convergence is. Convergence means bringing together different ideas and values to make one entity. The same is the case with cultural convergence, where different cultures come together to become multitudes

and form a unique culture accompanying the attributes of all those cultures. One Pop Culture and Online Expression culture influences the other, and thus, both cultures converge. Source: PNG Wing https://www.pngwing.com/en/free-png-zqsij Global convergence is the process of geographically distant cultures influencing one another despite the geographic obstacles that separate them. Nigeria's "Nollywood" cinema takes its cues from India's "Bollywood," which comes from Hollywood. The advantage of global convergence is worldwide access to a wealth of cultural influence. Its negative effect can be the threat of cultural imperialism. Cultural imperialism is how developing countries are "attracted, pressured, forced, and sometimes bribed into shaping social institutions to correspond to, or even promote, the values and structures of the dominating centre of the system. (Schiller, 1969). In other words, less powerful nations lose their cultural traditions as more powerful nations spread their culture through their media and popular culture. Cultural imperialism can be a formal policy, or it can happen more subtly, as with the spread of the outside influences of popular culture. When culture becomes a commercial commodity, the fear of the homogenisation of cultures rises. People worldwide learn to dress, eat, consume, and communicate similarly. Like Jeans have become universal clothing worldwide, localised cultural diversity could become endangered as a dominant, globalised culture becomes the norm. Martin & Nakayama (2011) state, "There is no easy way to measure the impact of popular culture, but we need to be sensitive to its influences on intercultural communication because, for so many of us, the world exists through popular culture." Cultural diffusion is about the geographical and social spread of different aspects of one or more cultures. Global convergence is more about the import of a cultural product from one place to another. Cultural diffusion is about the creative processes and adaptation of cultural traditions/ideas. There are many types of cultural diffusion, but some examples would be the US-originated fast-food restaurant McDonald's, which has developed different menu items for different parts of the world. For example, they developed the concept of McAloo Tikki in India. 139

Critiques of Cyberspace Check Your Progress: 3
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Briefly describe the beginning of Digital Media.

8.5 WHAT IS ONLINE EXPRESSION?
Pop culture provides youth many avenues to explore and express their identity better. Youth are attracted to pop culture as it makes them stand against the crowd. Many people who cannot figure out their own identity express themselves in terms of a character or icon they relate to. Social media is full of people who have spoken about pop culture icons and characters that helped them to accept themselves. Many even come out of the closet. Thus, pop culture helps people grow and become more accepting due to the vast representation of various pop culture genres. Source: Shutter Stock, https://www.shutterstock.com/search/political-commentator Youth express themselves openly and naturally on social media. Many types of research confirm the role of social media as a significant space for youth's social connections (Boyd, 2014) and political expressions (Lane et al., 2019; Literat & Kligler-Vilenchik, 2019). Online expression means creating and reacting to content online. This can be done through blogs, videos, podcasts, images and even communications (comments and interactions). Online expression can also be seen as how individuals and groups use digital platforms to create, share, and experience information and ideas. It is an ecosystem where users consume content and actively participate in its creation and circulation. Thus, it is called prosumers, and this phenomenon is mass self- communication. Boyd (2014) defines online expression as "how people use the affordances of online and networked communication to construct, project and manage their identities and relationships with others". Hargittai and Papacharissi (2009) view online expression as "the creation and circulation of messages through the Internet and associated digital technologies." Online expression operates on a spectrum between creation and consumption. On 140 one hand, users actively generate original content like blog posts, photos, videos,

and online art. On the other hand, they engage with existing content by reading Pop Culture and Online Expression articles, watching videos, or listening to music. It is important to note that even consumption can be interactive. Through commenting, sharing, and reacting, users influence the reach and meaning of existing content. Let us briefly discuss both these concepts of creation and consumption. Source: Freepik, https://www.freepik.com/premium-vector/refer-friend-concept -your-own-benefit_5516278.htm out expression where it occurs. Naturally, most prominently, it is on social media. Recent research confirms the role of social media as a salient space for young people's social connections (e.g., Boyd,
2014) and political expression (e.g., Lane et al., 2019; Literat & Kligler-Vilenchik,
2019) .
8.5.1 Creation
Learners, as put above, online expression, thrive on a dynamic interplay between creation and consumption. There is an active generation of original content for digital platforms in the online creation. This includes a textual dimension, where users write blog posts, articles, or social media updates, often weaving them with their narratives and viewpoints. Creating and sharing photographs, digital art, and infographics come in the visual sphere. In the auditory and video sphere, podcasts, music, vlogs, and live streams are mostly uploaded. Online games, simulations, and other engaging experiences are developed through interactive creation. So, the online creation is characterised by originality. It demands active user participation and tailoring content to the specific requirements of a platform.
8.5.2 Consumption
Online consumption focuses on the process of accessing and engaging with existing content. The consumption happens in various forms, including reading articles, news stories, and social media updates, often accompanied by comments and discussions. The visual dimension encompasses viewing images, videos, live streams, and online courses. The auditory aspect of online consumption thrives on podcasts, music, audiobooks, and webinars. Online platforms utilise algorithms to curate content for users based on their past activity, thus facilitating the discovery of content that the user might be interested in. Consumption can be seen as passive, with user/s simply absorbing content. However, it often needs a degree of interaction. Liking, commenting, sharing, and reacting contribute to the online discourse.

Critiques of Cyberspace Platforms often enable user-generated comments and reactions, which act as a form of micro-creation in response to existing content. Similarly, some consumption activities, like writing reviews or curating playlists, involve selection and organisation. This blurs the line between passive consumption and active participation in the online environment. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is Online Expression?

8.6 TYPES OF ONLINE EXPRESSION
There are multiple ways in which people can express their ideas, views, opinions, and creativity on online platforms. These expressions can take different forms depending on the medium and form of expression. Thus, certain types of online expressions are identified and discussed below. Source: iStock, https://www.istockphoto.com/search/ 2/image?mediatype=illustration&phrase=social+media+influencer
8.6.1 Blog
A blog is an online diary where people write what they feel and think about. It is like a personal expression in the form of this online space. Blogspot and WordPress provide space for writing blogs. Blogbasics (2017) defines a blog as a 'frequently updated online personal journal or diary'. Blogs mostly allow readers to comment on the blog posts. A typical blog will feature text, images, videos and links to related blogs and websites. A blog is a website where entries are displayed in reverse chronological order. Blogs allow anyone with Internet access to reach millions of audiences. The celebrity gossip chronicler Perez Hilton had no formal journalism training when he started

his blog, PerezHilton.com, in 2005. However, within a few years, he had reached Pop Culture and Online Expression millions of readers.
8.6.2 Vlog
A vlog is a form of blog where the medium of expression is primarily video. Vloggers mainly document their lives, experiences, or expertise through video content. Vlogging is a form of online expression where individuals or content creators share their thoughts, experiences, or expertise through video content. Vlogs often provide a personal and authentic glimpse into the creator's life, interests, or expertise. It fosters a sense of connection and engagement with the audience. Vloggers typically use platforms like YouTube, Facebook, and Instagram to upload their videos. The viewers can subscribe to their channels, like, comment, and share their content. Vlogs can come in different formats, such as daily, travel, educational, and more. Content creators may use storytelling, humour, or informative narration to convey messages to their audience effectively. Vlogs are a versatile medium for showcasing creativity and sharing the creator's passion. They also help build a loyal online following. People also do vlogging to earn money.
8.6.3 Social Media Posts
Social media posts are short-form content shared on social networking platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and LinkedIn. They can include text, images, videos, links, polls, etc. Social media allows users to express themselves, share information, and engage with their network of people. Social media posts serve diverse purposes. They can share personal updates, news articles, opinions, memes, promotional content, and more. Users and their network can interact with posts by liking, reacting, commenting, sharing, facilitating conversations, and fostering community engagement. Let us discuss some examples. A tweet on Twitter sharing a breaking news story with a brief comment expressing the user's opinion or reaction is a common example of a social media post. One can also share achievements or losses in one's personal life through social media posts. Another form of social media post is memes. Memes are a way to express emotions, whether from frustration or sadness or to make others laugh. They have an immense effect and influence on pop culture. Owing to their viral nature, Internet memes reach millions of online users. They touch on various topics like politics, mental health, or satire.
8.6.4 Reels
Reels are short-form video content typically found on social media platforms like Instagram, Facebook, TikTok (banned in India), and YouTube Shorts. They are usually 15 to 90 seconds long and feature quick cuts, music, special effects, and creative editing techniques to capture viewers' attention. Reels provide an engaging and entertaining way for users to share snippets of their lives, showcase their talents, participate in trending challenges, or promote products and services. The users often use popular music tracks, viral trends, and creative

Critiques of Cyberspace storytelling to appeal to a wide audience and increase engagement. Let us discuss an example. A dance challenge video posted on Instagram reels featuring catchy music, choreographed dance moves, and creative editing techniques is a typical example of a reel.
8.6.5 Web Journal
A web journal, also known as a blog, is an online platform where individuals, organisations, or businesses publish articles, essays, or personal reflections on various topics of interest. Blogs, as discussed above, allow writers to share their thoughts, insights, expertise, and experiences with a global audience through written content. Blogs can cover many topics, including lifestyle, fashion, travel, technology, health, business, politics, and more. They provide a platform for writers to express themselves, educate their audience, share valuable information, and establish themselves as thought leaders in their respective fields. For example, The Huffington Post is a prominent web journal which features articles and opinion pieces on politics, culture, entertainment, and current events. A diverse team of writers and contributors authors these posts.
8.6.6 Podcasting
A podcast is a digital radio or video programme which can be downloaded from the Internet. Subscribing to a podcast is like a blog. One can listen to a whole range of programmes and voices on podcasts. In the same way, as blogs have allowed users to become writers without having to deal with an editor in a media organisation, podcasting has allowed people to be interested in becoming a broadcaster. Many traditional radio shows are now available in a podcast format. Users see podcasts as the "Netflix for radio". 'Podcatching' software allows users to download the latest edition of any podcast to which they subscribe automatically. Most people use iTunes; go to www.apple.com/ iTunes/store for information on podcasting and a huge list of available podcasts. One can listen to the file on their computer or transfer it to an iPod or MP3 player. Podcasts are usually free; the most successful ones have high-quality content and production value. Podcasts are usually recorded and edited using home equipment. Specialised podcasting software such as Apple's Garage Band or QuickTime Pro is available. These packages make it simple to record, mix and format the audio files correctly. Just like bloggers and vloggers, many podcasters are attempting to figure out ways to turn listeners into revenue. Twenty-one per cent of Americans have listened to a monthly podcast, the same number of Americans that use Twitter. In addition, 75% of podcast listeners act on a sponsored message, which creates a vast potential audience for marketing messages (Main, 2016). Podcasts, thus, offer an immense opportunity for marketers. The bottom line is that the users can now get content to their target markets. In doing so, they need not persuade a media channel to carry it or to pay substantial advertising rates.
8.6.7 Web Radio
Web radio, or Internet radio, refers to radio stations broadcasting their content over 144 the Internet rather than traditional FM or AM frequencies. Web radio offers listeners

various programming options, including music, talk shows, podcasts, news, etc. These Pop Culture and Online Expression programs are accessible from any Internet-connected device. Web radio stations cater to diverse interests and preferences, offering niche programming, curated playlists, and live broadcasts tailored for specific audiences. Listeners can tune in to their favourite stations, discover new music, and engage with hosts and fellow listeners through interactive features like live chats and social media integration. For Example, NPR (National et al.) streams its radio programs online. Listeners can access live broadcasts, on-demand shows, and podcasts from their website or mobile app, which provides a comprehensive and convenient listening experience.
8.6.8 Web TV
Web TV, also known as Internet television, refers to television content streamed over the Internet rather than broadcast through traditional television networks. Web TV platforms offer a wide range of programming options, including TV shows, movies, documentaries, news, and original series, accessible on-demand, or live streaming. Web TV platforms like Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, Hulu, and Disney+ provide subscribers with a vast library of content that caters to diverse interests and preferences. Viewers can binge-watch their favourite shows, discover new content, and enjoy high-quality entertainment from the comfort of their homes or while travelling. Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Define a Blog and mention its characteristics.

8.7 SOME CONCERNS
Online expression has many benefits, including expressing your feelings and thoughts, sharing opinions, bringing people together for a cause, and even shaping political engagements. However, there are many concerns related to this medium. Some of the concerns discussed in this section are real vs. virtual, privacy issues, fake news and deep fake, trolls, cyberbullying, identity theft, and freedom of expression or toxins. Let us discuss these concepts one by one.
8.7.1 Real Vs. Virtual
There is a difference between the real-world experiences where we live and the created online universe in which we indulge and interact, which we put as virtual. The two have a stark boundary, but the lines are blurring. Due to this blurring of

Critiques of Cyberspace lines, there is social isolation and a distorted sense of self-worth among the users who heavily invest time and create a virtual identity in online spaces. A study by the Loneliness and Isolation Lab at the University of Chicago (2020) shows that more than 30% of Indian youth feel lonely 'often' or 'always'. Social media use was identified as a potential contributing factor in those cases. More engaging in online interaction leads to neglecting real-world relationships, which results in a sense of disconnection. The created/curated presentation of lives on social media creates unrealistic expectations among the youth and many mental health issues like OCD (Obsessive et al.), FOMO (Fear of Missing Out) and many more. In a survey (2023) by the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), it was found that over 40% of teenagers in India are struggling with body image issues and social media comparisons of lifestyles leading to mental health issues. Thus, this blurring between real and virtual must be adequately understood to reduce its impact on society.
8.7.2 Privacy Issues
Privacy Issue is another concern related to online activities. Social media and online services/ apps collect users' personal information for their benefit. This may lead to potential misuse of user data/information. In India, no comprehensive data protection law raises concerns about the vast amount of personal data collected through online applications and services. A report (2022) by the Internet Freedom Foundation (IFF) found that almost all social media platforms collect user data, viz., their location, browsing history, and online activities. Targeted advertising and data breaches create many issues that demand strong regulations and user awareness. Celebrity culture and reality TV are contributing to a voyeuristic culture and unnecessary attention and intrusion into the private lives of people. This may lead to severe mental health and well-being issues in those people. Due to the rise in the impact of social media and reality TV, there are concerns about privacy and surveillance. People often willingly share personal information online, leading to privacy breaches and potential exploitation. You all have come across the issues raised by the online availability of Aadhaar (Unique ID) information of each citizen of India. Source: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/prime/technology-and-startups/popular- apps-have-vulnerabilities-in-how-they-connect-to-the-cloud-at-risk-is-users-personal-data-/ primearticleshow/82780550.cms?from=mdr
8.7.3 Fakes: Fake News, Deep Fake
The rise in online activities and multiplicity of online platforms has led to the spread

of misinformation and disinformation. The news circulated online is often disguised Pop Culture and Online Expression as legitimate news but negatively impacts public discourse and decision-making. The deep fakes are hyper-realistic manipulated videos of a person or a scenario that complicate the issue. It distorts the view, and one cannot discern truth from fiction. One must have seen many fake videos of celebrities and politicians speaking something controversial. The deepfake technology is still in a nascent stage in India. It can be potentially misused for political manipulation or social disruption. Since the Internet is an open space where anyone can write anything and share, anyone can set up a credible-sounding website and disseminate false information. These days, IT cells of political parties are intentionally peddling fake/ distorted news for their benefit or bringing the opponent down. This problem is mainly w.r.t intent and interest; anyone knowingly or unknowingly may publish unreliable or outright false information. There is an information explosion on the Internet, which creates a dilemma for information seekers in identifying the correct information. The problem aggravates given that much of the information on the Internet is not the work of professional authors. These works are put in by amateurs with questionable expertise in a particular area. The idea of self-publishing on the Internet without any editorial review leads to the peddling of fake information/ news. Also, not stringent IT laws cause a rise in deepfakes and fake news for vested interests.
8.7.4 Trolls
Many times, users misuse the anonymity provided by online platforms to engage in toxic online behaviour. One such behaviour is trolling, where people use cuss/ derogatory/abusive words for other people whom they do not like or agree with to get a reaction from them. Thus, trolling is an act of deliberately provoking others online. A report by Pratham Books (2021) reveals that many journalists and activists face online harassment and trolling campaigns. These acts were mainly intended to silence dissent, which is also bad for a healthy democracy. Online media, which was supposed to democratise the communication flow, has now become a tool for cyberbullying for many. Source: https://www.usatechblog.com/blog/the-impact-of-social-media-on-criminal-defense- strategies/#google_vignette
8.7.5 Cyber Bullying
Another behaviour is cyberbullying, where electronic communication is used to bully a person (particularly young people) and bring them down by tarnishing their image. It can have severe psychological consequences. A survey by UNICEF (2022) found that over 42% of Indian children aged 15-19 have experienced some form of cyberbullying. Among them, girls are disproportionately targeted. 147

Critiques of Cyberspace 8.7.6 Identity Theft
Digital media platforms are also a breeding ground for identity theft. Criminals often steal personal information to impersonate individuals for financial gain or other malicious purposes. A report (2023) by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has found that identity theft-related cyber frauds have increased by over 200% in the past three years. Identities are stolen for malicious purposes, such as spreading misinformation or damaging reputations. You must have heard about Jamtara in Jharkhand, where most of the cyber frauds in India happen. Source: https://twitter.com/aiplexdigital
8.7.7 Freedom of Expression or Toxic Behaviour
The Indian constitution allows freedom of expression to each citizen. However, in the age of social media, there is a need to balance freedom of expression with preventing the spread of hate speech, harassment, and other forms of toxic online behaviour. Online platforms struggle to define acceptable expression boundaries while safeguarding the user's right to protection from harm. Pop culture reinforces stereotypes and develops desensitisation to violence. Reinforcement of Stereotypes: Pop culture promotes stereotypes based on caste, race, gender, religion, sexuality, and other characteristics. These stereotypes lead to discrimination, bias, and a lack of understanding among different groups within society. Desensitisation to Violence: There is an excessive availability of violent content in pop culture in terms of movies, video games, and music. Exposure to such content can desensitise people to real-world violence and may lead to a more tolerant attitude toward aggression and harmful activities. Check Your Progress: 6 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss privacy issues w.r.t online expression.

148

Pop Culture and Online
8.8 LET US SUM UP
Expression Learners, here we have come to the end of this Unit. Let us sum up what exactly we have discussed till now. First, we began by defining various terms related to culture, such as pop culture, mass culture, high culture, and low culture. Popular culture constantly evolves and is unique to its time and place. Societal influences and institutions merge to appeal to a broad cross-section of people within a culture. According to Internet Live Stats (2018), there are 3.5 billion daily Google searches. Whether we embrace or resist it, popular culture serves important cultural functions. Those functions are connected to cultural identities, both personal and national. Pop culture is also an economic force that influences how we get information about and understand other cultural groups. Further, we described the rise of pop culture in the world, as well as in India. We discussed different examples. In doing so, we further elaborated on the cultural values shaping the pop culture and, in turn, pop culture shaping the cultural values. We also discussed ideas like how the consumption of pop culture happens and how pop culture becomes a tool for mass expression concerning social, political, economic, and cultural aspects. We further elaborated on the coming of digital media and the rise of pop culture. We also described the rise of digital media and its popularity leading to cultural convergence. Cultural convergence is an idea where different cultures come together to form a new understanding or a product of a new culture. In this Unit, we also defined online expression and its concept of creation and consumption. Further, we differentiated between different types of online expression. We discussed blogs, vlogs, social media posts, reels, web journals, podcasts, radio, and web TV. Towards the end of this Unit, we analysed different concerns related to online expression. We discussed the idea of Real vs Virtual, Privacy Issues, Fake News, Deep Fake, Trolls, Cyber Bullying, Identity Theft and Freedom of expression. This freedom of expression in the content of social media, viral content and pop culture is a true positive expression or a toxic one. So, overall, we discussed the whole development of online media and how, in that context, pop culture is shaped throughout the world.
8.9 KEYWORDS
Popular Culture : Popular culture refers to the entirety of ideas, perspectives, attitudes, images, and phenomena that are within the mainstream of a given culture. It is often influenced by mass media and encompasses elements such as entertainment, fashion, technology trends, and slang. Mass Culture : Mass culture refers to the cultural products (such as music, movies, literature, and art) that are created for and consumed by large audiences, typically through mass media channels. It is characterised by its broad appeal and its tendency to reflect and shape the values and norms of society.

Critiques of Cyberspace Digital Media : Digital media encompasses all forms of media content that are stored and transmitted electronically. This includes text, images, audio, and video content that is created, distributed, and accessed through digital platforms such as the Internet, social media, mobile devices, and digital television. Social Media : Social media refers to online platforms and technologies that enable users to create, share, and exchange content and engage in social networking. These platforms facilitate communication and interaction among individuals and groups, allowing users to connect, collaborate, and share information in real-time. Cultural Convergence : Cultural convergence refers to the blending or merging of different cultural elements, often facilitated by advances in technology and globalisation. It involves the exchange and integration of ideas, values, practices, and artefacts from diverse cultural traditions, leading to the emergence of hybrid cultural forms and expressions. Online Expression : Online expression refers to the act of communicating, sharing ideas, opinions, emotions, and experiences through digital platforms and technologies. It encompasses various forms of expression, including writing, blogging, vlogging, posting photos and videos, commenting, and engaging in discussions on the Internet. Prosumers : Prosumers are individuals who both consume and produce content, particularly in the context of digital media and online communities. They actively participate in the creation and distribution of content, blurring the traditional distinction between producers and consumers of media. Fake News : Fake news refers to false or misleading information presented as news, often spread intentionally to deceive, or manipulate audiences. It can be generated and disseminated through various media channels, including social media, websites, and traditional news outlets. Deep Fake : Deep fake refers to synthetic media, such as videos or images, that have been manipulated or generated using advanced artificial intelligence techniques. Deep fake technology can convincingly depict individuals saying or doing things that they never actually did, raising concerns about misinformation and manipulation.

Trolls : Trolls are individuals who intentionally disrupt Pop Culture and Online Expression online communities and provoke emotional or hostile responses from others by posting inflammatory, off-topic, or offensive content. They often seek attention or amusement through their disruptive behaviour. Cyber Bullying : Cyberbullying refers to the use of digital communication technologies, such as social media, text messages, or online forums, to harass, intimidate, or threaten others. It involves repeated and deliberate aggression, often targeting individuals based on their perceived vulnerabilities or differences. Identity Theft : Identity theft is the unauthorised use of someone else's personal information, such as their name, Social Security number, or financial details, to commit fraud or other criminal activities. It can occur through various means, including phishing scams, data breaches, and hacking.
8.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Alex, R.A., Media, and Popular Culture,
https://ebooks.inflibnet.ac.in/engp16/ chapter/media-and-popular-culture/
2. Appadurai, A. (2000). "Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Culture
Economy." In Theory, Culture & Society.
3. Barry Brummett in Rhetorical Dimensions of Popular Culture
4. Central Community College Nebraska. (n.d.). Popular Culture. [LibGuides].
Retrieved March 29, 2024, from https://libguides.cccneb.edu/popculture
5. Crossman. A., (2019). Sociological Definition of Popular Culture, Thought Co.
https://www.thoughtco.com/popular-culture-definition-3026453
6. Delaney, T. (2007). Pop Culture: An Overview. Philosophy Now, 64(5), https:/
/philosophynow.org/issues/64/Pop_Culture_An_Overview
7. Fiske, J. (2010). Understanding Popular Culture. Routledge.
8. Gokulsing, K. M., & Dissanayake, W. (Eds.). (2009). Popular Culture in a
Globalised India. Routledge.
9. Garnham, N. (1990). "The Media and Social Change." In Media, Culture &
Society.
10. Krumrey, K., (2022). Intercultural Communication for the Community College
(Second Edition), Press Books, https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/comm115/ chapter/chapter-8/
11. Literat, I., & Kligler-Vilenchik, N. (2021). How Popular Culture Prompts Youth
Collective Political Expression and Cross-Cutting Political Talk on Social Media:

Critiques of Cyberspace A Cross-Platform Analysis. Social Media + Society, 7(2). https://doi.org/10.1177/ 20563051211008821
12. Lule. J., (2013). Understanding Media and Culture: An Introduction to Mass
Communication, Flat World Knowledge.
13. Miller, T. (2008). Cultural Studies: An Introduction. Routledge.
14. Ohiagu, O. P., & Okorie, V. O. (2014). Social media: Shaping and Transmitting
Popular Culture. Covenant Journal of Communication.
15. Pop Culture: An Overview (https://news.uchicago.edu/tag/loneliness).
16. Storey, J. (2021). Cultural Theory and Popular Culture: An Introduction,
Routledge.
17. Storey, John. (2014) Cultural Theory and Popular Culture: An Introduction.
Pearson Education Limited.
18. https://www.unicef.org/india/press-releases/safer-internet-day-unicef-calls-
concerted-action-prevent-bullying-and-harassment
8.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1
1. "Popular culture consists of the aspects of attitudes, behaviours, beliefs,
customs, and tastes that define the people of any society. So, in the historic term, one can say that popular culture is the culture of the people." Check Your Progress 2 First, people should increase their awareness of the role of the media in forming views, normalising ideas, and spreading stereotypes. Second, we need to understand that there is a choice in what media we consume and what we do not. Third, there is no need to accept everything that mass media promotes. Check Your Progress 3
1. The seeds of digital media were sown in the 1960s and 1970s. The
invention of mainframe computers and the initial Internet, pioneered by projects like ARPANET, laid the foundation for the interconnected exchange of digital information. In the 1970s and 1980s, personal computing began with the Apple II. This machine empowered individuals to create and share information through rudimentary forms of digital communication, such as Bulletin Board Systems (BBS). However, the real development of the Internet happened with the arrival of the World Wide Web in the 1990s. The web browsers (Mosaic and Netscape) made accessing online information more user-friendly. Also, email became the initial communication tool of the 152 present digital age.

Check Your Progress 4 Pop Culture and Online
Expression
1. Online expression means creating and reacting to content online. This can be
done through blogs, videos, podcasts, images and even communications (comments and interactions). Online expression can also be seen as how individuals and groups use digital platforms to create, share, and experience information and ideas. It is an ecosystem where users consume content and actively participate in its creation and circulation. Thus, it is called prosumers, and this phenomenon is mass self- communication. Boyd (2014) defines online expression as "how people use the affordances of online and networked communication to construct, project and manage their identities and relationships with others". Hargittai & Papacharissi (2009) view online expression as "the creation and circulation of messages through the Internet and associated digital technologies". Check Your Progress 5
1. A blog is an online diary where people write what they feel and think about.
It is like a personal expression in the form of this online space. Blogspot and WordPress provide space for writing blogs. Blogbasics (2017) defines a blog as a 'frequently updated online personal journal or diary'. Blogs mostly allow readers to comment on the blog posts. A typical blog will feature text, images, videos and links to related blogs and websites. A blog is a website where entries are displayed in reverse chronological order. Check Your Progress 6
1. Privacy issues are another concern related to online activities. Social media
and online services/ apps collect users' personal information for their benefit. This may lead to potential misuse of user data/information. In India, no comprehensive data protection law raises concerns about the vast amount of personal data collected through online applications and services. A report (2022) by the Internet Freedom Foundation (IFF) found that almost all social media platforms collect user data, viz., their location, browsing history, and online activities. Targeted advertising and data breaches create many issues that demand strong regulations and user awareness. Celebrity culture and reality TV are contributing to a voyeuristic culture and unnecessary attention and intrusion into the private lives of people. This may lead to severe mental health and well-being issues in those people. Due to the rise in the impact of social media and reality TV, there are concerns about privacy and surveillance. People often willingly share personal information online, leading to privacy breaches and potential exploitation. You all have come across the issues raised by the online availability of Aadhaar (Unique ID) information of each citizen of India.

UNIT 9 ONLINE COMMUNICATION AND
COLLABORATIONS
Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Evolution of Online Communication
9.3 Communication Styles in Online Environments
9.4 Tools and Platforms
9.5 Role of Social Media
9.6 Benefits and Challenges
9.7 Ethical considerations
9.8 Case Studies
9.9 Let Us Sum Up
9.10 Keywords
9.11 Further Readings
9.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
While communication is defined as the process whereby information is exchanged between individuals/organisations, this is achieved through a commonly agreed system of symbols, signs, or behaviour. Online communication is the process of communication over a computer network, and in today's context, it is understood as communication over the Internet. Similarly, while collaboration is when two or more people work together to create or achieve the same objective, online collaboration refers to working over the Internet using various tools and platforms. It is assumed that any collaboration requires communication, so the terms communication and collaboration are being used together. With digital technology and its advancements, online communication and collaborations have become increasingly significant, transforming how individuals, organisations, businesses, and societies interact. These digital technologies foster faster and real- time connectivity, increase efficiency and enhance innovation. They do so in the following ways: Global Connectivity and Knowledge Sharing: Online communications allow individuals, organisations, and businesses to connect globally, transcending geographical boundaries and time zones. This leads to a more interconnected world and fosters collaborations among people with diverse cultures, backgrounds, and perspectives, leading to knowledge sharing across diverse fields. Efficiency and Speed Leading to Cost Savings and Enhanced Productivity: Digital communication tools allow real-time communication. This facilitates quicker responses, 154 helps with faster decision-making and project completion, and increases efficiency

in various aspects of personal and professional life. Online communication and Online Communication
and Collaborations
collaborations also save costs by reducing physical presence and associated costs. Flexibility and Remote Work: Digital tools have ushered in remote and flexible schedules, allowing for better work-life balance, and opening a larger talent pool, enhancing creativity. Online collaboration tools enable teams to share ideas and iterate in real time, leading to innovation. Networking and Relationship Building: Online communication using social media and peer-to-peer messaging apps enables individuals and businesses to maintain relationships with peers, clients, partners, and the public, leading to new opportunities for collaboration. Besides the above, digital technologies in online communication and collaboration generate vast amounts of data, which help gain insights into user behaviour, preferences, and trends. This assists businesses in making informed decisions and helping them cater to audience/customer needs. This Unit will explore how online communication evolved and the various tools and platforms used in online collaborations. We will then examine social media's role in online communications and collaborations. With benefits come challenges, and we shall explore the benefits and challenges of online communication and collaboration along with the ethics of online communication. We will end the Unit with a few case studies demonstrating online communication and collaboration.
9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Define and explain online communication and online collaboration; Understand how digital technologies have changed communication and collaboration for individuals, organisations, and businesses; Discuss about the various tools and platforms for online communication and collaborations; Explain how social media has changed online communications and collaborations; and Enumerate the online communication and collaboration's benefits, challenges, and ethical considerations.
9.2 EVOLUTION OF ONLINE COMMUNICATION
Online communication can be traced back to developments in computer and communication network technology and advances in communications technology. The first transatlantic telegraph cable was laid in 1858. The telegraph was the start of electronic communication. The first commercial communications satellite was Telstar 1, which the USA launched in July 1962. The ARPANET, launched in 1966 by the US Department of Defence, laid the foundation for the Internet. In 1971, Ray Tomlinson sent the first email, heralding electronic messaging and starting online communication. 155

Critiques of Cyberspace The 1980s saw the start of BBS or the Bulletin Board System. A computer server running software allows users to connect to the system using a terminal program. Usenet was a global discussion system organised into newsgroups. It allowed users to post and read messages on various topics. World Wide Web (WWW) became publicly accessible in 1990, leading to expansion in online communication. The introduction of web browsers led by Mosaic (subsequently named Netscape) led to the popularity of the Web. Meanwhile, instant messaging (IM) gained popularity with the launch of services like ICQ in 1996(AOL acquired in 1998) and AOL Instant Messenger (AIM) in 1997. These platforms allowed real-time text communication between users. The late 1990s also saw the emergence of blogs (a truncation of "weblog") written in the form of discrete, often informal diary-style text entries (posts). This was facilitated by the advent of web publishing tools that non-technical users could use. The late 1990s also saw the start of live streaming, with the Internet company "RealNetworks" developing the first media player capable of live streaming -- RealPlayer. On November 8, 1999, the first-ever presidential webcast was held at George Washington University in Washington, DC. The 2000s saw the rise of Web 2.0, which emphasised user-generated content, interactivity, and collaborations. It also brought social media platforms like Friendster in 2002, Myspace in 2003, and Facebook in 2004. YouTube brought the live- streaming industry mainstream. In 2008, YouTube hosted its first live event, YouTube Live. In 2011, Twitch TV (formerly known as Justin TV) launched a new streaming platform designed for video games. Mobile communication and smartphone technology in the 2010s transformed online communication. With mobile messaging apps like WhatsApp (2009) and WeChat (2011), online communication became real-time. Instagram (2010) and Snapchat (2011) platforms' emphasis on multimedia content changed how people shared experiences online. In 2013, four satellites were launched into medium Earth orbit (MEO) to provide Internet access to the "three billion" people without stable Internet access. The pandemic of 2020 accelerated the use of video conferencing platforms and introduced the concept of virtual meetings and remote working using video conferencing tools like Zoom, Teams, and Meet. Emerging technologies of Virtual (VR) and Augmented reality (AR) are expected to play a significant role in online communications.
9.3 COMMUNICATION STYLES IN ONLINE
ENVIRONMENTS
Online Communication styles change based on the context, nature of interaction, and platform on which communication is attempted. Some of these styles are very similar to those in real-world communication. Verbal and Nonverbal: Verbal communication can be oral or written. Oral communication relies on visual communication and uses platforms like Instagram, TikTok, and Pinterest, as well as video calls on messaging platforms. Written 156 communication can be done using messaging apps, Twitter, and discussion forums.

Nonverbal communication in textual online communication is also done through Online Communication
and Collaborations
emoticons, emojis, GIFs, memes, and reaction buttons. Formal and Informal: While formal follows the rules, informal is casual and relaxed. Formal is used in academic and professional settings and is common in email communication, formal messaging, and professional forums. Informal communication has a conversational tone, includes abbreviations, emojis, etc., and is common in social media, chats, and blogs. Synchronous and Asynchronous: Synchronous communication happens through live chats and video or audio calls and helps in dynamic exchanges and quick decision- making. Asynchronous communication includes emails and messages where participants determine their own time to respond based on either geographical and time separation or for detailed responses. Broadcast and Narrowcast: Social media platforms and webinars broadcast information while meeting and collaborating with apps like Google Meet, Messaging groups, or Slack narrowcast information to select people or teams. Online communication can be interactive, empathetic, or aggressive, like real-world communication. Understanding and adapting to different communication styles, platforms, and community norms can make it effective.
9.4 TOOLS AND PLATFORMS
These digital collaborative tools and platforms enable individuals and teams to work together irrespective of whether they are separated by geography or time zones. These can be further subdivided by their functionality, i.e. project management, document collaboration, etc. The choice of tools or platforms depends on the individual's or team's specific needs and preferences. Some of these platforms and tools based on functionality are: Document Collaboration: Google offers a workspace that includes Docs, Sheets, Slides, and Drive for real-time collaborations on documents, spreadsheets, and presentations. Similarly, Microsoft offers the Microsoft 365 suite with Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and OneDrive for document creation and sharing. File Storage and Sharing: These applications allow individuals and teams to collaborate on content from anywhere and anytime securely. Microsoft OneDrive, Google Drive, Dropbox, ProtonDrive, etc., are some of the best cloud-based file storages and sharing services. Video Conferencing: These tools allow for virtual meetings in real-time and have become important tools for online communication and collaboration. Their importance increased manifold during the pandemic lockdown. Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and Google Meet allow online meetings, screen sharing, and more. Communication and Messaging: These platforms integrate team communication and collaboration. For example, Slack is a cloud-based, free, cross-platform team communication tool in which teams can communicate through text messages, file and media sharing, and voice and video calls, both private and workspace communication. Slack also integrates with other software. Similarly, Microsoft Teams and Google Workspace integrate various communication and collaboration elements.

Critiques of Cyberspace Project Management: This software tool helps business teams organise, track, and execute projects. It also prevents work duplication and time wasted in searching for material. Some project management tools available include Asana, Trello, Jira, Monday, Clickup, etc. Screenshot of the Asana project management tool (https://asana.com/) Screenshot of the Monday project management tool (https://monday.com/) Besides the above, there are niche platforms and tools, for example, GitHub, a platform and cloud-based service for software development and version control that allows software developers to store and manage their code; Salesforce, a Customer Relationship Management (CRM) platform that helps businesses manage customer relationships, sales, and support.
9.5 ROLE OF SOCIAL MEDIA
Social media consists of various web-based tools that enable users to distribute and share new ideas, thoughts, and information in a more interactive and virtual environment (Esam & Hashim, 2016; Joosten, 2012). With the rapid growth of mobile technology and mobile phones becoming the primary mode of Internet access in large parts of the world, social media applications offer an extremely efficient way to communicate, collaborate and build social networks among their users. Social Media has played a significant role in altering the online

communication and collaboration landscape. It has been able to do so in the Online Communication
and Collaborations
following ways: Real-Time Communication: Social media enables real-time communication through comments, updates, and messaging, which leads to quick information sharing and responses. Users can share a wide range of content, including text, audio, video, and more.
Global Connectivity and Collaborative Content Creation: Social Media breaks
geographical barriers and allows individuals and teams to connect across spaces and time zones. Facebook Groups, Twitter Spaces, etc., are discussion forums of shared content. This fosters a sense of community of common interests, causes, goals, and shared knowledge, allowing crowdsourcing ideas and information. Professional Networking: Platforms like LinkedIn allow professional networking, allowing individuals to connect with peers and potential collaborators. Okonkwo and Awad, in their 2023 study "The Role of Social Media in Enhancing Communication and Collaboration in Business", highlighted the role of social media as a vital tool to connect with customers, employees and other stakeholders in innovative ways, thus becoming an important and effective tool for online communication and collaboration. They write that social media does this role in the following ways: Positive Network Externalities: Network externalities are the advantages derived from products or services when people using that product or services increase the value of those products or services for others. For example, the formation of virtual "environment" communities on social media generates positive network externalities to its members where the communities communicate and collaborate with information, ideas, and experiences on a better "environment", leading to members even acting like reducing carbon footprint, based on this sharing towards a better world. Business Capital Growth: Social media makes it easy to obtain information about customers and their preferences, competitors, industry trends, and market conditions. It is also a fast way to collect product feedback and new product concepts before launching, reducing the risk of failure. In addition, social media increases customer engagement and loyalty. In education, Al-Brahmi, Othman, and Yusuf (2015) found that collaborative learning with the assistance of social media encourages learning and knowledge sharing among students as social media tools support collaborative activities. Social media helps establish virtual relationships, allowing students to see diverse information from multiple sources. Also, social media tools enable users to interact socially and create interpersonal relationships with peers and their guides, allowing them to cope with an unfamiliar social environment (Dholakia, 2004; Zhou et al., 2010). Hence, social media is a great tool for online communication and collaboration, which is why it is increasingly integrated with platforms for customer relationship management, event management, and other related activities.

Critiques of Cyberspace Check Your Progress - 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you mean by online communication and collaboration? What are the
various communication styles online?

2. What are Online Communication and Collaboration Tools, and how are they
subdivided? Answer by giving some examples.

9.6 BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES
The above section shows students the tremendous benefits of online communication and collaboration. Before discussing the challenges, let us list the benefits again. Global Connectivity and Real-Time Communications allow individuals and businesses to connect in real-time and asynchronously, fostering collaborations, increasing flexibility, and enabling remote work. Increased Efficiency and Cost Saving: The above speeds up communication and collaboration, leading to quicker turnaround and decision-making. Remote and flexible working saves cost on workforce movement, and with an increased talent pool, enhances production and makes the process efficient. However, there are various challenges to online communication and collaboration. Some of them are: Technical Issues: As online communication and collaboration are mediated by computers and computer networks, Internet connectivity issues, including Internet shutdowns, software glitches, and hardware failures, can disrupt them. For example, a dropped call during video conferencing or a computer crash during remote work can disrupt team meetings and real-time information sharing. Security Challenges: Protecting data is always a challenge in online communication and collaborations as the transactions are done over the Internet, a public computer network. Securing the data, ensuring it is authentic, and ensuring no man-in-the- middle attack happens on sensitive data are huge challenges. For example, a story in Fortune, "Leaked Slack all-hands meeting reveals a 'strong culture clash' and a growing rift with parent company Salesforce" (https://fortune.com/2023/01/05/leaked- slack-all-hands-meeting-reveals-a-strong-culture-clash-and-growing-rift-with-parent- company-salesforce/) is about leaked Slack communication of the company 160 "Salesforce". Such stories raise suspicions about security in online communications

and bring a bad name to brands and companies whose internal communications Online Communication
and Collaborations
are leaked in the eyes of customers. Social Challenges: Mental health is a significant consequence of virtual connections. For example, studies on young adults show that social media is associated with increased levels of anxiety, depression, and loneliness due to the pressure to curate a refined image of oneself online, fostering a culture of comparison and competition. There is an intense competition for likes and virality of content. This is especially hard on vulnerable individuals, especially ones with pre-existing mental health conditions. Online also have issues of Cyberbullying and other cybercrimes which play out worst for the vulnerable and the minorities. Communication Misinterpretations: Technologically mediated communication, such as chats, online messages, and emails, lacks nonverbal cues, which can lead to misinterpretations. Digital Fatigue: The abundance of communication channels and online information leads to information overload and a challenge to filter and prioritise communication and work. With digital technology allowing connectivity anywhere and anytime, work- life balance can lead to fatigue and burnout. Team Dynamics: Overdependence on technology reduces team rapport building and affects group/company dynamics, affecting team cohesion and team spirit. Hence, effective communication and collaboration strategies are required, along with the right technology infrastructure, including online security protocols, to build a collaborative and inclusive work culture in companies that take advantage of online communication and collaboration.
9.7 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
There are various ethical considerations in online communications. O'Neill (2022), writing in her blog, mentions how online technologies have indeed made it easier to inflict and spread a great variety of harms like being used to distribute pornography, incite violence, promote anorexia, denigrate others, defraud, and deceive. However, the link between specific online activities and resulting harms varies depending on many factors. For example, she mentions how telling the truth in an online community may benefit many cases but may cause distress in others. She adds that online communication may harm the vulnerable or the immature; joking, lying, and false claims can be mistakenly taken as accurate or evidenced, resulting in serious harm. For example, the case of falsehood, like drinking bleach as a cure for COVID- 19, resulted in serious harm to many people. Hence, according to O'Neill, the discussion on acceptable and unacceptable online communication must also focus on norms and standards that online communication respects or flouts. (Note: One of the ethical considerations in journalism is the minimisation of harm caused to individuals or communities by the journalist). Another important ethical consideration is protecting privacy. Digital technologies make protecting privacy challenging. Due to excessive data generated in digital interactions and with the Internet as a globally connected medium, it is easier to obtain, organise, redistribute, link, suppress and sell data linked to personal information. In the online world, insignificant data about an individual can make her 161

Critiques of Cyberspace identifiable to those with access to other information about the individual. For example, in online collaborations between organisations and businesses, the privacy of individuals becomes compromised if the business and organisations' data security practices are lax. This is made worse often by minimum consent requirements on digital platforms for data processing and selling data. O'Neill writes that digital technology has expanded the ease with which information, including personal, is spread without informed agreements by users as the consent procedures by platforms, applications, and websites, due to the lure of data monetisation, fail to put adequate safeguards to control the leakage of personal information putting individual privacy at risk. O'Neill then writes about anonymity and power in the online world. Unlike in the real world, anonymous and pseudonymous actors have transformed the range and power of anonymity through misinformation, conspiracies, the sale of personal data, etc. Ethical considerations in the online world also include plagiarism and copyright infringement. With a large amount of information, including online research and digital technology allowing easy copy and paste, concerns about Plagiarism and Copyright Infringement are relevant ethical issues. Using somebody else's content and passing it under a business or organisation name without citing the source is plagiarism. At the same time, Copyright Infringement happens when an intellectual work is copied, modified, or distributed without the creator's permission.
9.8 CASE STUDIES
The following case studies explain how digital technology and the Internet are used for online communication and collaboration. Case Study 1: IBM IBM, or International Business Machines Corporation, is an American multinational technology corporation headquartered in New York, USA. It is present in over 175 countries and has over 3.5 lac employees worldwide. Its suite of products includes computer hardware and software as well as hosting and consulting services. It is also the largest industrial research organisation in the world, with 19 research facilities across a dozen countries. In 2020, IBM deployed the workplace chat app Slack to all 350,000 employees worldwide. Before the company's formal deployment, the employees and teams had used the application for over six years. IBM teams use Slack channels (for example, #development-team) whereby team members can openly discuss issues while experts from other teams can add inputs by joining these channels. This is done in the following way, as detailed by Lawless, a senior software engineer at IBM, Team channels contain messages from people and system alerts from their numerous applications. For example, a developer submits a user story in the source code for review. The system triggers a notification in the team's Slack channel, letting everyone know the new code is up for review. The reviewer can then go into the system to review the code directly from that Slack message.

This online communication and collaboration are much more efficient because before Online Communication
and Collaborations
Slack communication and collaboration were introduced, a developer would need to find an expert to review the code, then open a one-to-one communication and wait for the person to respond. With Slack communication, the developer reaches the desired expert and gets notified of the changes without leaving work or chasing resources. In addition to internal communication, with a product called "Slack Connect," IBM collaborates and connects with external organisations. Giving examples of popular channels and conversational examples at IBM, Lawless writes: # Help services collect notifications to facilitate automated peer code reviews and alert the team when the request has been approved. Team members use #help- deployments to get notified of failed deployments as code changes make their way through test automation. #help-tasks is used to post notifications when there is a failure in batch processing jobs. Hence, these channels serve as audit trails, and resolving problems with this history of process flow is easier and more efficient. Besides Slack for communication, IBM also uses other Salesforce products, Such as Sales Cloud, a customer relationship management (CRM) product; Service Cloud for service delivery teams; and Partner Management for IBM business partners. As per Quinlan, these optimised solutions, with Watson AI-powered integrations, are speeding up problem resolution, improving insights, and increasing business outcomes at IBM. Case Study 2: Airbnb Airbnb, Inc., is an American online marketplace based in San Francisco, USA, for short- and long-term homestays. "Airbnb" is a shortened version of its original name, "AirBedandBreakfast," and is the most well-known company for short- term housing rentals. As of June 2023, it operated in 100,000 cities and towns, over 220 countries, and over 1.5 billion guests arriving at 4 million hosts. The online company acts as a broker, and its revenue is based on the commissions it charges for each booking. Airbnb has two primary customers: the guests who booked a homestay and the owners who rented out their properties for this homestay. Airbnb (Note: An online company) uses customer relationship management (CRM) to establish a strong connection with the guests. It is not a hotel chain but a platform, so it does not provide the hosts with a centralised CRM system. It relies on a combination of third-party tools integrated into its online communication and collaboration platform that allows hosts to manage their guest relationships effectively. For example: Messaging system: A built-in feature that enables hosts to communicate with guests right from a guest query during and after their stay. Reviews: Allows guests to leave feedback after a stay, allowing other prospective guests to evaluate properties. Host and Super host tools: Include price tips, availability calendars, and messaging templates to help hosts manage their listings. Super hosts (exceptional hosts) receive a badge on their profile, increased visibility, and exclusive features. Third-party CRM: Hosts can use their own CRM from

Critiques of Cyberspace Salesforce, Zoho, etc, which is integrated with Airbnb CRM and provides advanced analytics for enhancing guest experience. Airbnb CRM software can help hosts track and analyse their guests' behaviour, from data history of booking, preferences, and feedback, helping them decide on renting their properties. This way, Airbnb, a platform-based delivery of short- and long-term homestays, uses online communication and collaboration and will attain a revenue of US$8.40 billion in 2022. Case Study 3: Online collaborative learning Education is one of the best examples of online communication and collaboration, and the Internet has revolutionised them. When the COVID-19 pandemic hit the world, online communication and collaboration allowed students not to miss education and life to continue. From using message apps like WhatsApp/ Telegram/Signal and email to communicate and share class links and timetables to using video conferencing apps like Zoom/Google Meet/Microsoft Teams to conduct online classes. This trend has been around for some time now. As Tapscott (2008) stated, in education research, the net generations converge on a learner-focused pedagogy model based on collaboration rather than traditional teacher-focused pedagogical approaches. For example, social networking sites provide users with new ways to access, socialise, communicate, and co-create with other users on those sites. These web-based tools serve as a critical mechanism for communication and collaboration among students (Al-Khalifa & Garcia, 2013) and thus also promote the feedback process as a significant part of collaborative learning (Ricoy & Feliz, 2016). Lock and Redmond (2021) did a study on the affordance of online communication and collaboration technology, which has provided a forum for preservice and practising teachers and educators to engage in an authentic discourse where multiple perspectives can be shared. Quoting Fowler & Mayes (1999), who identified the shift in learning from 'what' students learn to 'who' they learn from, they felt that the online environment provides a rich learning space where students can learn with and from each other. They felt that in an online collaborative learning space, the student is active rather than passive ... It is the individual learner's interpretation and processing of what is received through the senses that creates knowledge (Ally, 2008). Ally further goes on to list the advantages of online learning and collaboration, i.e. No time zones and location or distance limitations; Asynchronous allows online material to be accessed anytime while synchronous allows for real-time interaction between students and instructors; Use of the Internet to access up- to-date and relevant learning material and sharing it with fellow students; Multiplexing of learning with jobs can contextualise learning; Tutors can be tutoring for anytime, anywhere while online material updated in real-time as well guide students to appropriate reading material based on needs and Online learning systems can be tailored to individual learners, their expertise and learning outcomes.

Check Your Progress - 2 Online Communication
and Collaborations
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How has social media changed online communication and collaboration?

2. What are the various challenges of online communication and collaboration?

3. Are there any ethical challenges in online communication and collaboration?

9.9 LET US SUM UP
Communication is the information exchange process between individuals through a common agreed system of symbols, signs, or behaviour; online communication is the process of communication over a computer network. In today's context, the term is understood as communication over the Internet. Collaboration is a situation where two or more people working together create or achieve the same objective; online collaboration refers to them working over the Internet using various tools and platforms. Digital technologies foster faster and real-time connectivity, increase efficiency, and enhance innovation. They do so in Global Connectivity and Knowledge Sharing, Efficiency and Speed, leading to Cost Savings and Enhanced Productivity, Flexibility and Remote Work, and Networking and Relationship Building. Online communication can be traced back to computer and communication network technology developments. It all started with the ARPANET by the US Department of Defence, which laid the foundation for the Internet. The 2000s saw the rise of Web 2.0, which emphasised user-generated content (UGC), interactivity, and collaborations. Social media platforms like Facebook emerged in 2004. Emerging technologies of Virtual (VR) and Augmented reality (AR) are expected to play a significant role in online communications. Digital collaborative tools and platforms enable individuals and teams to work together regardless of whether they are separated by geography or time zones. Their functionality can be subdivided into Document Collaboration, File Storage and Sharing, 165

Critiques of Cyberspace Video Conferencing, Communication and Messaging, and Project Management. The choice of tools depends on the specific needs and preferences of the individuals or teams using them. Social media consists of various web-based tools that enable users to distribute and share new ideas, thoughts, and information in a more interactive and virtual environment. Social Media has significantly altered online communication and collaboration through Real-Time Communication, Global Connectivity, Collaborative Content Creation, and Professional Networking. The benefits of online communication and collaboration include global connectivity, real-time communication for individuals and businesses, increased efficiency, and cost savings. Challenges include Technical Issues, Security Challenges,
Communication Misinterpretations, Digital Fatigue, and Team Dynamics. Besides
the benefits and challenges, there are various ethical considerations. Online technologies have made it easier to inflict and spread a great variety of harm, especially against the vulnerable or the immature, with joking, lying, and false claims mistakenly taken as accurate or evidenced. There is the problem of protecting privacy with excessive data generated in digital interactions and the Internet being an easier medium to obtain, organise, redistribute, link, suppress and sell data linked to personal information.
9.10 KEYWORDS
Cyberbullying : Is sending, posting, or sharing negative, harmful, false, or mean content about someone else over digital devices. It can also include personal or private information about someone else that causes embarrassment or humiliation to the person. Fair Use : Fair use is a branch of copyright law relating to reusing and reproducing copyrighted material. For a work to be considered fair use, it must meet several conditions. The four main determining factors are the Purpose and character of the use, the Nature of the copyrighted work, the Amount and substantiality of the portion reused, and the effect of the use upon the potential market. Man-in-the-Middle Attack : This is a term in cryptography and computer security. A man-in-the-middle attack is a cyberattack in which the attacker secretly inserts themselves between two parties who believe they are directly communicating. The inserted person then relays and possibly alters the communications between the parties. Social Networking refers to using social media sites to stay connected with friends, family, colleagues, or customers. Social networking

can have a social purpose, a business purpose, Online Communication
and Collaborations
or both.
UGC : User-generated or User-Created Content is
any form of content, such as text, images, photos, videos, audio, etc., posted or uploaded to social media platforms or the web.
9.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Ally, M. (2008). Foundations of educational theory for online learning:
The theory and practice of online learning (T. Anderson, Ed.). Athabasca University Press. (15-44)
2. Al-Rahmi W. M., Othman M. S., Yusuf L. M. (2015). Social media for
collaborative learning and engagement: Adoption framework in higher education institutions in Malaysia. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences 6: S1.3. Dholakia U. M. (2004). A social influence model of consumer participation in
the network- and small-group-based virtual communities. International Journal of Research in Marketing 21: 241-263.4. Esam N. M., Hashim N. (2016). The impact of social media use on academic
performance among UITM Puncak Perdana Students. Research Hub 2(2): 16- 23.5. Fowler, C.J.H. & Mayes, J.T. (1999). Learning relationships from theory to
design, ALT-J, 7:3, 6-16, DOI: 10.1080/0968776990070302
6. Joosten T. (2012). Social media for educators: Strategies and best practices.
Jossey-Bass.
7. Lawrence, T. (n.d). How the engineering team at IBM uses Slack throughout
the development lifecycle. https://slack.com/intl/en-in/customer-stories/engineering- ibm-development-lifecycle.
8. Lock, J & Redmond, P.(2021). Embedded experts in online collaborative learning:
A case study, The Internet and Higher Education, Volume 48, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.iheduc.2020.100773.9. Okonkwo, I & Awad, H. (2023). The Role of Social Media in Enhancing
Communication and Collaboration in Business. Journal of Digital Marketing
and Communication. 3.19-27.10.53623/jdmc.v3i1.247.10. O'Neill, O. (2022, February 16). The Ethics of Online Communication. https:/
/iai.tv/articles/the-ethics-of-online-communication-auid-2053
11. Quinlan, J (n.d) IBM's productivity platform: On the cutting edge of
innovation and excellence. https://slack.com/intl/en-in/customer-stories/ibms- productivity-platform-cutting-edge-of-innovation-and-excellence.
12. Zhou H., Li H., Liu Y. (2010). The effect of flow experience on mobile SNS
users' loyalty. Industrial Management & Data System 110(6): 930-946.9. 12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress - 1
1. Online communication and collaboration are the process of communication
and working over a computer network. In today's context, it is understood as online communication using various tools and platforms. Communication styles online are very similar to the ones in real-world communication. Online communication can be interactive, empathetic, or aggressive, like real-world communication. One can be formal and informal, verbal, and non-verbal, synchronous, and asynchronous, and one's messages can be broadcast or broadcast online.
2. Online Communication and Collaboration Tools are digital tools and platforms
that enable individuals and teams to work together irrespective of whether they are separated by geography or time zones. These are normally subdivided by their functionality, i.e. document collaboration, file storage and sharing, video conferencing, messaging, and project management; the choice of tools or platforms depends on the specific needs and preferences of the individuals or teams using them. For example, Microsoft 365 suite offers Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and OneDrive for document creation and sharing; Zoom, Microsoft Teams and Google Meet allow for online meetings and screen sharing, while project management tools include Asana, Trello, Jira, Monday and Click. Check Your Progress - 2
1. Social Media has played a significant role in altering the online communication
and collaboration landscape. This has happened as social media enables sharing a wide range of content, including text, audio, and video, in real time through comments, updates and messaging, which leads to quick information sharing and responses. Besides this, social media breaks down geographical barriers and allows individuals and teams to connect across spaces and time zones, fostering a sense of community of common interests, causes, goals, and shared knowledge. Then, professional networking platforms allow individuals to connect with peers and potential collaborators. Social media in education helps establish virtual relationships, allowing students to see diverse information from multiple sources. It also enables its users to interact socially and create interpersonal relationships with peers and their guides, allowing them to cope with an unfamiliar social environment.
2. Besides the various benefits of online communication and collaboration, individuals,
and organisations face challenges. The biggest challenge is technical issues related to devices and networks. As a computer and a computer network use hardware and corresponding software, any breakdown or glitch in either one, including the network which connects these computers, could disrupt the process. To add to the technical challenges are the security challenges as processing and storing data in a digital format and communication using a public network like the Internet exposes individuals and organisations to threat actors who wish to harm an individual or the reputation of an organisation, including harming financially due to data theft.

As virtual connections transcend space and time, online connections could be Online Communication
and Collaborations
a social challenge if individuals cannot balance work and home lives. Online also have issues of Cyberbullying and other cybercrimes which play out worst for the vulnerable and the minorities. Then, there are issues in virtual communication and work, such as communication misinterpretations, digital fatigue, and lack of team rapport and dynamics.
3. Virtual communications, in which the communicator is anonymous, bring their
share of ethical considerations. The link between specific online activities and resulting harms varies depending on many factors. In the real world, people have a chance for clarifications in communication, which becomes tenuous as the people communicating cannot be seen, and hence, verbal cues are absent. So, a joke online can get misinterpreted as a serious comment, leading to trust issues. Online communication may harm the vulnerable or the immature. Another important ethical consideration in online shopping is protecting privacy. As digital technologies generate much data without ethics, it is easier to leave unsecured personal data on local or network drives, which can then be obtained, organised, and sold by threat actors. In the online world, insignificant data about an individual can make her identifiable to those with access to other information about the individual. Besides, the above two considerations involving plagiarism and copyright infringement are ethical considerations for online communication and collaboration.

Block-3
Analysis of Participation

BLOCK 3 INTRODUCTION: ANALYSIS OF
PARTICIPATION
After exploring the communication patterns of digital media and critically examining the different modes of cyberspace, in Block 3, you will learn the levels of opportunities and scopes available for online users on digital platforms. The Units in this Block explore the dynamics of user participation and its relationships with the collective actions of more extensive human interactions. Since the digital platform is multifaceted, users have plenty of tools to convey their messages. More importantly, we need to understand that many individuals or groups have a specific reason for their participation in the digital space. Let us understand these perspectives in the Block.
Unit 10: Mode of Production in Cyberspace. The mode of production in
cyberspace revolutionises economic activities, social dynamics, and technological mechanisms. This Unit explores how digital platforms redefine content creation, distribution, and commerce. Understanding this transformation is essential for comprehending modern journalism and communication. By the end of this Unit, you will grasp the dynamics of production in cyberspace, understand the principles of online journalism, analyse media functioning in digital ecosystems, evaluate journalism's status in India, and explore challenges and opportunities in digital journalism.
Unit 11: Ideology and Digital Communication. Through this Unit, you will
understand the symbiotic relationship between ideology and digital communication. It explores how ideologies shape content creation, distribution, and consumption online. By examining persuasive technologies, echo chambers, and biases, you will gain insights into the complexities of digital discourse. Case studies illuminate real- world implications, while discussions on the future of civic discourse prompt critical thinking.
Unit 12: Semiotics and Digital Communication. You will understand the
fascinating world of signs and symbols in the digital realm after reading this Unit. From understanding the basics of semiotics to its application in digital contexts, this Unit explore how meaning is created and conveyed online. Through discussions on digital semiotics, key concepts, principles, and real- world examples, you will gain insights into the intricate dynamics of digital communication.
Unit 13: Issues of Big Data. In this Unit, you will learn about the vast
landscape of big data, exploring its definition, characteristics, and types. This Unit uncover how big data impacts the media industry, driving business strategies and influencing content creation. Moreover, you will critically examine big data's social implications and ethical considerations.
Unit 14: Political Economy and ICT. This Unit introduces the nexus between
political economy and information communication technology (ICT). It explores political economy's origins, definitions, and characteristics alongside media ownership dynamics. It unravels the evolution of ICT and its role in shaping the political economy of personal information. It identifies concepts and the evolution of political economy, discusses media ownership dynamics, analyses different schools of thought, evaluates ICT challenges, and connects political economy with ICT.

Interaction is a unique feature of digital and online platforms, and this Block discusses explicitly the characteristics of interactive platforms. We discuss very diverse perspectives on interactivity and the dynamics of digital communication, and we hope that you will gain a broader understanding of these perspectives.

Mode of Production
UNIT 10 MODE OF PRODUCTION IN
in Cyberspace
CYBERSPACE
Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 Mode of Production - Definition
10.3 Understanding Online Journalism
10.4 Modes of Online News Production
10.5 Labour in Online News Production
10.6 Content Consumption Trends
10.7 The Impact of Media Convergence
10.8 Future - Policy Solutions, Independence, and Accountability
10.9 Conclusion
10.10 Keywords
10.11 Further Readings
10.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
10.0 INTRODUCTION
The mode of production is how a society conducts its economic activity to produce goods and services. It is also about social relations around such activity and the mechanical and technological means to achieve the objectives. The cyberspace, which has emerged as an essential component of economic activity, requires a new understanding of this process. Driven by software products and solutions and digital technologies, cyberspace has added a new dimension to the mode of production. The mode of production in cyberspace comprises the methods and processes that work on a solid IT and digital infrastructure to produce goods and services. While some of these methods and processes help produce physical goods faster and more efficiently, others produce IT goods and services to facilitate a host of digital services. The list includes creating and distributing content, newspapers, multimedia content production, e-commerce facilitation, digital payment transactions, and virtual conferences (Google Meet, Microsoft Teams, and Zoom). Though they started as extensions of real-life processes in the mode of production, these processes and methods evolved into an integral part and indispensable part of the traditional mode of production. In this Unit, we will discuss how the mode of production works in cyberspace media. With digital technologies and solutions maturing significantly, the media is transforming. The media can now produce standalone, digital-only products and services (YouTube channels, e-papers, and podcasts) supported by electronic delivery services (social media platforms such as WhatsApp, websites, and emails). 175

Analysis of Participation The emergence of cyberspace has profoundly transformed the traditional modes of media production, introducing new opportunities, challenges, and complexities. To understand this phenomenon, we need to understand how the mode of production in cyberspace works, the key elements that make online journalism succeed, and what challenges traditional media organisations face to stay relevant and succeed.
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Understand the characteristics and features of the Mode of Production in Cyberspace for medium; Understand the key characteristics and principles of online journalism; How the ecosystem works to make media function in cyberspace; Comprehend the status of the mode of production in journalism in India and gain insight into the processes and methods of production in this space; Understand the challenges and opportunities of online journalism; and Explore the evolving role of journalists and news organisations in the digital age.
10.2 MODE OF PRODUCTION - DEFINITION
The mode of production in cyberspace explains the processes and methods of creating, distributing, and consuming digital goods, services, and information on digital platforms. An ecosystem of digital platforms, content creators, technology service providers, gadget manufacturers, online communities, service providers, technology professionals, banks, and fintech companies (to facilitate money transactions), regulators, and policymakers work to make it possible. Journalists, multimedia experts, photo-videographers, software engineers, Search Engine Optimisation (SEO) experts, web developers, digital payment players, policymakers, and readers are the key stakeholders in the mode of production ecosystem.
10.3 RELEVANCE OF MODE OF PRODUCTION
JOURNALISM / MEDIA
The media industry is undergoing a radical transformation. The Internet, digital platforms, digital technologies, the proliferation of digital gadgets, and affordable bandwidth availability have changed how print and electronic media function and deliver content. The media convergence (merging of print and electronic media) has brought in several changes in newsroom functioning and new content delivery platforms (websites, YouTube channels, podcasts, WhatsApp, Telegram, Facebook, Koo, LinkedIn, X (formerly Twitter) and podcast platforms). This calls for a fresh understanding of the media industry's mode of production in cyberspace. Here are some key aspects of this mode of production.

Faster delivery of content: The mode of production helps the media reduce the Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
time needed to reach its readers or audience. Journalists can reach their target readers in real-time. Democratisation: Cyberspace has resulted in the democratisation of content creation and delivery. Digital gadgets are so powerful that even an ordinary individual can create content on par with any established media organisation. You can be a citizen journalist and start giving news updates and expressing your opinions 24 hours daily. You can write blogs or make vlogs (video blogs) and become social media influencers. New economic activity: Due to a well-established mode of production in cyberspace for media, you can earn money by creating content. User-generated content is valued by the audience, who don't mind who created it if it informs, enlightens, or entertains them. You can teach, build a vast follower base to promote products, and get paid for content (video) from advertisers and advertising aggregators such as Google. This economic activity is ably supported by universal digital payment solutions (Bhim app) and banking payment solutions such as IMPS (Immediate Payment Service), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and RTGS (Real-Time Gross Settlement). Diversity: The mode of production in media cyberspace facilitates a diverse set of people with deep knowledge and expertise in some fields (medicine, psychology, sports, music, and sports) monetising their content. This diversity allows people from all walks of life to participate in media economic activity, unlike traditional media, where only a few organisations form the core of the media industry. However, the number of women in the digital media ecosystem could be higher. This could distort the representation of women in digital media content. Also, the content developed in the digital space is mostly English. Though there are efforts to improve the content in Indian languages, English continues to dominate the content space, leaving non-English readers out of the space. Interactivity The media production mode in cyberspace promotes interactivity and exchanging ideas in real-time. You can talk to the most prominent political, corporate, scientific, and entertainment leaders. Both media organisations, journalists, and users get feedback immediately. They can rate your content. If your content is contextual and meaningful, it can go 'viral' (shared by many people), forcing others to create similar content. Data journalism Cyberspace allows the creators to incorporate visual elements (infographics and videos) to make the content more appealing. Since space and time are no constraints (common constraints in print, TV, and radio media), media organisations and individuals can incorporate large datasets (graphs, images, and videos) to make the content more authentic, informative, and entertaining. Content with more data convinces the readers and audiences. 177

Activity - 1 However, the mode of production in cyberspace comes with certain serious challenges. It leads to the proliferation of fake news, misinformation, noise (unwanted and useless content), and fraudulent content. Since digital platforms allow quick dissemination of content, this dark side could pose serious challenges to communities and countries. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the key features of modes of production?

2. Enumerate the influence of digital technology in new modes of production?

10.3 UNDERSTANDING ONLINE JOURNALISM
Online journalism creates and distributes content (news, information, and entertainment) over digital channels such as websites, social media platforms (ex, Facebook, LinkedIn, Instagram, WhatsApp, and YouTube), podcasts, and live streaming. This will happen in two ways. Traditional media organisations (newspapers, television, and radio) have begun to have an online presence. To grow the reader and audience base in the digital world, they are trying to tailor or customise the content to suit their needs. There are digital-only publications that started their ventures afresh, creating and distributing content through various digital platforms. The content consumption habits of readers and audiences in the digital world are completely different from those in the physical world. They want content delivered in real-time, wherever they go and whenever they want. They are no longer passive news consumers like readers and audiences in the physical world. The digital readers and audience want to produce content themselves, give feedback immediately, and interact with the news creators. User-generated content User-generated content is created by individuals who are not attached to any media organisation. The availability of affordable digital gadgets, bandwidth, and other equipment allows individuals to create and publish their content on digital platforms.
178 This type of content ranges from text to videos and podcasts.

New business models Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
Online journalism has erased the physical barriers, allowing content creators (traditional media organisations, digital-only publications, and individual creators) to reach out to people with a digital gadget. It has created new business models. While the subscription model (as in the physical world) is one important revenue-generating avenue, the online window has opened various new avenues to make money: sponsorships, endorsements, advertisements, and promotions. Some service providers charge a fee to do all the work required to create and distribute the content on behalf of the creators on various digital platforms. They also make money by taking a portion of the revenues. Social media platforms like Google (and its video-sharing platform YouTube), Facebook (and its small video-sharing platforms like Instagram), X (formerly known as Twitter), and LinkedIn charge their subscribers to increase their visibility and reach.
10.4 MODES OF ONLINE NEWS PRODUCTION
A key aspect of Mode of Production in journalism is producing content for various online channels. This includes developing text, video, audio (for podcasts), infographics, and specialised content for platforms such as Instagram, YouTube Reels, and WhatsApp channels. Unlike traditional content formats, cyberspace requires media organisations and individual creators to tailor-made content to meet the consumption requirements of readers or audiences belonging to different age groups, geographies, languages, and tastes. Immediacy: In sharp contrast to the traditional way of reporting, online journalism The online environment enables real-time reporting, allowing journalists to provide instant updates and live coverage of events as they unfold. Social media platforms and live streaming technologies play a pivotal role in delivering news in real-time, fostering an immediate and interactive connection between journalists and audiences. Collaboration: Online journalism requires greater collaboration and flexibility among reporters and the desk. As against traditional production (ex, newspapers), where reporters and sub-editors have abundant time to send reports and make pages, online editions require quick action. A reporter must file a short report directly (with a photo or video) from the event venue and alert the web desk. The web desk must quickly edit and publish the report (including the videos and audio) online. Sometimes, coordination is required between multiple bureaus. Algorithms at work One of the digital platforms' key strengths is their ability to personalise content and recommend content users might like to read or watch. Digital media platforms deploy 179

Analysis of Participation artificial intelligence and machine learning solutions to understand users' likes and dislikes subtly. The algorithms also monitor user content consumption across different accounts and websites. Depending on a user's content consumption preferences, the platforms would throw 'suggestions' within the feed and on the sidebars. They would also promote relevant advertisements and websites. This will prompt the users to 'click' some links or 'follow' certain accounts. SEO optimisation: A key aspect of online journalism is Search Engine Optimisation (SEO). The content needs to be curated and pushed per the machines' demands. The search engines continuously audit and measure the content consumption patterns. Organisations need to keep in mind what is being read and watched. They have to strictly follow the metrics provided by SEO experts, file and publish SEO-ready reports, and use the 'keywords' to attract the attention of search engines. Storytelling Formats: Unlike traditional media formats, online journalism offers a scope to tell stories in various ways. Journalists can create content embedding videos, audio, images, and infographics. These can be standalone stories, or all clubbed into one. While the young audience prefers to consume content in short format (Reels) and longer videos, other older consumers expect both short and longer-format text and video content. Digital-first strategy Media organisations have adopted the digital-first or mobile-first strategy to tap a huge opportunity in the digital world. Traditional and digitally-only media organisations have invested in relevant infrastructure to produce and distribute content across various digital platforms. They mandate reporters and sub-editors to know the new demands for on-the-go content consumption. User-Generated Content: Digital technologies and platforms allow users to create and publish content independently. As it democratises publication, the online window has allowed common people to express their opinions, report live events, and showcase their talent in various domains. It has enabled a participatory approach to content production. Some users have gained the confidence of readers and audiences in the digital world for their well- informed posts and comments. Some are so popular on social media that they have more subscribers or followers than most traditional media organisations. Traditional media organisations ask reporters and sub-editors to create similar content when their posts go viral and gain the world's attention. They vet the user-generated 180 content for story ideas and develop them into full-fledged reports.

Check Your Progress: 2 Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is the definition of the mode of production in cyberspace?

2. What are the key elements of online journalism's mode of production?

3. What are the key challenges in online journalism?

10.5 LABOUR IN ONLINE NEWS PRODUCTION
Digital media workflows are not radically different from physical media workflows. However, certain additional job roles are required for online news production. Apart from reporters, sub-editors, and an editor, digital media organisations employ people with skills to create and distribute content. Besides journalists (reporters and sub-editors), digital media companies employ digital editors, multimedia producers, data analysts, web developers, SEO experts, freelancers, videographers, social media managers, web developers, and freelancers. Digital Editors: Digital editors play an important role in online news production. They manage the editorial process, ensuring immediacy and clarity. If they work for a traditional media organisation's digital publication, they collaborate with the print desk and reporters to identify relevant topics for the day and generate content accordingly. If it is a standalone, digital-first, and mobile-first organisation, its role is much more important as it has to drive content generation. It doesn't have the luxury of taking content from the parent media organisation. Also, it must ensure accuracy, clarity, and journalistic standards as it produces content. It should work with SEOs to spot trends and develop content to meet demand. Multimedia Producers: Online news production often involves multimedia elements such as videos, audio clips, images, and interactive elements. Multimedia producers, which includes job roles such as videographers, photographers, and graphic designers. They plan and 181

Analysis of Participation work with relevant journalists (reports and the sub-editors) to contribute their skills to enhance the storytelling experience. They are responsible for planning and lining up visually rich website content offerings. They are expected to be well-versed with relevant editing software solutions to make the videos very brief. Social Media Managers: Social media has emerged as an inseparable part of online journalism. Their mandate is to monetise the content in the digital space. Those asked to head their respective social media teams are responsible for the content generated and published on their platforms. After the digital content creation team develops the content, social media managers should be cautious when distributing it on their accounts. They should not waste time because search engine algorithms reward the first movers by prominently promoting the links. They need to act very responsibly while handling the feedback from some readers on the content and headlines. In some organisations, they also act as audience engagement specialists. Some other organisations assign the job to a dedicated 'audience engagement' team. Web Developers: Web developers and designers are at the forefront of making a website or digital property successful. They handle the technical aspects of online news production and delivery, help digital media organisations build websites and blogs, and work constantly to resolve glitches. They also create an easy-to-navigate homepage and help readers find relevant sections. Freelancers and experts The digital media teams also keep a list of freelancers, who include domain experts in various subjects (economy, science, stock markets, information technology, etc). The team alerts them well in advance for special articles on special occasions (satellite launches, budget presentations, and health emergencies). Citizen journalists Digital technologies and platforms have democratised the ability to publish content freely. People with simple digital devices and a good broadband plan can publish content on their social media platforms, blogs, and websites. Technically, they can be as fast or even faster than the digital media outlets belonging to traditional media organisations. Since they don't need to spend much on employees and offices, they can survive and compete with established players. Sometimes, they follow citizen journalists and develop stories based on their posts and comments. Recognising their potential, some media organisations allow citizen journalists to publish their content on their platforms. Challenges: Unlike traditional media, digital media is highly demanding. It calls for regular and immediate publication of news and other content. Reporters must maintain speed and accuracy while filing reports, while sub-editors are expected to process the content, giving no scope for mistakes. Any mistake could seriously tarnish the organisation's image. Since readers would like to go to a site that gives them the news first, digital media organisations are under stress to meet the demand.

Media organisations, in general, and journalists, in particular, face tough competition Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
from resource-rich competitors, influencers, and citizen journalists. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the new job roles in the digital media production environment?

2. Compare and contrast the modes of production in online vs offline media?

10.6 CONTENT CONSUMPTION TRENDS
Digital technologies, platforms, affordable digital gadgets, and bandwidth have significantly changed how people consume news and other forms of content. Digital space The proliferation of digital technologies, platforms, and gadgets (smartphones and tablets) has allowed people to consume news and other forms of content. The main reason for the shift to the digital world is unhindered access to content. People can read or watch the content wherever they are. Smartphones have become affordable and powerful, with a huge processing capacity and memory. However, readers' attention spans have narrowed, forcing media organisations to develop bite-sized (short-length) reports and videos. For those who have time, they produce longer-duration content (long-form stories and longer videos). Emergence of social media The proliferation of digital technologies and gadgets facilitated the penetration of social media networks such as YouTube, Facebook, X (formerly known as Twitter), LinkedIn, Truecaller, WhatsApp, Koo, and Instagram. These platforms allow users to publish photos, opinions, and videos, exposing them to many other users worldwide. This has opened many opportunities for people to showcase their talent and express their opinions on any issue. Algorithms and customised content Digital technology companies like Google and Facebook use artificial intelligence and machine learning solutions to carefully monitor their users' content consumption preferences and online behaviour their users' online behaviour. Based on the analysis, they automatically curate the content and suggest the content that suits their likes.

Analysis of Participation They also block or report abusive or unwanted content that doesn't suit their tastes and opinions. Based on the feedback, the algorithms prepare personalised content suggestions. News aggregators The Internet is an ocean of information and content, and people can't find the right content. Some media organisations have started news aggregating services to help them identify relevant sources of information. These companies filter the Internet and segregate news reports according to user preferences. Google, Flipboard Daily Hunt, and Inshorts are some of the aggregators. This helps users save time and effort in accessing the content they like.
10.7 THE IMPACT OF MEDIA CONVERGENCE
Media convergence is at the heart of this transformation in the media industry. According to media studies experts, convergence is integrating separate media (print, radio, and television) to provide a common platform. This converged platform allows users to access content from all media platforms seamlessly. Media convergence has forced traditional media organisations to create exclusive web teams to develop content for digital readers and audiences. It has also required journalists (reporters and sub-editors) to equip themselves with tools and skills to produce content for digital readers. Journalists are expected to become multitaskers. In addition to writing stories for the print medium, they are expected to learn multimedia storytelling by incorporating elements such as photos, videos, and infographics in their reports.
Multi-platform Publishing
Convergence has erased the boundaries between various media platforms, which used to function separately. While print medium reporters are expected to do video interviews and podcasts, television and radio reporters are asked to file reports for their web editions. Social media factor While convergence media has allowed traditional media organisations to reach more audiences, it has also required journalists to spend additional time developing content for digital editions and engaging with readers there. The requirement to constantly monitor developments and file reports puts heavy pressure on journalists. Citizen journalism is also posing a challenge. Many people are publishing posts and reports on even small developments. When some of such posts or reports go viral, it puts pressure on journalists and media organisations to produce similar content. If they don't, they will be left out of online metrics. They are also expected to take and respond to readers' feedback, including hateful and abusive comments from trolls. Impact on small publications Media convergence profoundly impacts traditional media organisations, which don't have the financial resources to open digital properties. With readers shifting their

loyalties to digital media platforms, newspapers have reported a significant drop in Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
circulation and revenues. To cut costs, they reduced the number of pages and jobs. Several publications had to close operations, unable to take the pressure any longer.
10.8 FUTURE - POLICY SOLUTIONS,
INDEPENDENCE, AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Online journalism is here to stay. Though it is still evolving as different media organisations are at varying levels of adapting to digital transformation, it is important to note that online journalism will be the order of the day. We need to find ways and means to oversee its evolution to streamline its growth. Policy Suggestions: As the digital media space expands rapidly, we must discuss and evolve a policy framework to help the media industry tap the opportunity and address its challenges. Good policy support will help build a healthy and independent news ecosystem. Governments should safeguard press freedom, ensuring journalists have the freedom to report. Governments should promote media literacy initiatives to educate people about misinformation, fake news, and fact-checking. They should work with bodies like the Press Council of India and Press Academies in different States to organise workshops to teach multimedia skills to journalists. It is essential to protect the independence of news organisations. It is essential for a healthy democracy. Media organisations should foster editorial independence, allowing journalists to report stories without bias or external pressure. Accountability: Accountability is a key attribute that helps media organisations earn trust and credibility. Transparency in funding and revenue sources plays a significant role in building trust. Media organisations should implement a mechanism to process content diligently and check facts thoroughly before publishing such articles. Digital media organisations should answer their readers, engage with them on various social media platforms, collect feedback, and initiate corrective measures. By taking a balanced approach to the above-mentioned issues, media organisations, society, and event organisers must factor in their feedback. Key challenges The mode of production in online journalism faces several challenges. Some are extensions of the fundamental challenges it faces in the physical world. The digital world accentuates some of the problems and presents certain new challenges.
Digital Divide
There is a huge digital divide worldwide, creating disparities in access to technology, Internet connectivity, and digital literacy. The gap between people with digital gadgets and resources and those who don't is increasing daily. Though smartphone and bandwidth prices have decreased significantly, making them more accessible, the divide continues regarding access to digital resources. 185

Analysis of Participation The mode of production in cyberspace has further aggravated the digital divide, which can prevent equal participation and opportunities in the online economy. Resource crunch The media industry faces financial challenges due to shifts in content consumption preferences. More and more people are consuming content on digital gadgets, requiring all media organisations to produce and distribute content through digital media. However, the digital transformation process requires huge financial and human resources, and most traditional media organisations lack the financial resources to embark on it. The challenge for more prominent organisations that can invest money in digital transformation is that digital media channels are not yielding enough revenues. Existing ventures report lesser revenues, and the digital channels are not making enough money to justify the investments. This has become a big challenge for the media industry. Skill shortage To prepare for new responsibilities (catering to digital readers and audiences), journalists must equip themselves with new skills and learn new processes. Unfortunately, not all media organisations invest money upgrading their employees' skills. However, they expect them to contribute heavily to producing and disseminating content on various digital platforms. The journalists are being asked to spend more time and do more work without being given additional remuneration. They are left to themselves to learn new skills to make themselves relevant. This is impacting their quality of life. Misinformation and fake news The proliferation of digital technologies, platforms, and cheaper Internet plans have allowed more people to open websites and digital TV channels. Since no effective controls and regulations exist, the scope for misinformation and fake news has increased significantly. Unverified news and deliberate attempts to spread false news could pose serious societal challenges.
Intellectual Property
The digital space also poses a serious challenge to intellectual property rights. Content, the key raw material for media organisations, is copied extensively by some people. They are using the copied content to develop stories, causing severe losses to those who created it.
Large Language Models
Large Language Models (ex: OpenAI's ChatGPT, Microsoft's CoPilot, and Google's Gemini) have begun to enter newsrooms. This, however, could cause some problems as the answers provided by the LLMs could violate the copyrights of other creators. Also, there is a possibility that the answers might include unverified facts, numbers, and quotes. Using such unverified data could not only mislead the readers but also tarnish the image of the media organisations and journalists. LLMs are not just about creating text content. Many can also create images, videos, presentations, and songs. However, these LLMs can also cause similar problems 186 if not used properly.

However, there is a solution. Some IT professionals and companies are developing Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
SLMs (Small Language Models), which work on a specific domain and the data created by a specific organisation. An organisation can effectively use the data it creates when it develops its own SLM.
Data Privacy and Security
Cyberspace's mode of production is largely about the development, collection, storage, analysis, and distribution of huge amounts of data, including personal and sensitive data. Any breach into computer networks could result in the theft of sensitive data, exposing people's privacy. Loss of data to hackers could cause severe losses to media organisations. Organisations should focus on deploying strong cybersecurity solutions to protect the data. Platform monopolies The domination of digital technology companies such as Google and Facebook, which dominate the digital publishing platform business, creates platform monopolies in the digital space. They play a dominant role in the mode of production in cyberspace. They can control what content should be published, read, and shared worldwide. This has triggered a global discussion. Even established media organisations are expected to follow the conditions set by such platforms. Several media organisations and countries have openly opposed their domination in the digital publication space. Also, people with huge financial resources can buy space from the platform owners to make their content visible. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Name three skills journalists must acquire to be relevant in the digital era.

2. Name two digital platforms and describe their role in the digital mode of
production.

3. What is data journalism, and why is it significant in today's media landscape?

Analysis of Participation 10.9 LET US SUM UP
There is a need to understand and assess the mode of production in the media industry in the backdrop of the evolution of media convergence. It will help the ecosystem streamline and standardise processes and define job roles. Since online journalism expects media organisations to update their websites and digital channels around the clock, it causes stress and anxiety among journalists and others involved in news production delivery. It also poses the challenges of misinformation, fake news, and deep fakes.
10.10 KEYWORDS
Accountability : The obligation to answer for one's actions, ensuring transparency and responsibility in decision-making processes, particularly within institutions or individuals holding power or influence. Algorithms : Sets of instructions or rules followed by computers to perform tasks, make calculations, or solve problems, crucial in processes such as data analysis, machine learning, and automation. Citizen journalism : The practice of ordinary individuals, often utilising digital technologies, to report news and share information, contributing to media coverage alongside traditional news organisations. Data Journalism : Utilising data analysis and visualisation techniques to investigate, interpret, and present news stories, providing deeper insights and understanding of complex issues. Deep fakes : Artificially generated multimedia content, often using advanced machine learning techniques, to convincingly depict events, people, or statements that are fabricated or altered. Digital Literacy : The ability to access, evaluate, and critically understand information and communication technologies, enabling individuals to navigate and participate effectively in the digital world. Fake news : False or misleading information presented as news, often disseminated through online platforms, with the intention to deceive or manipulate public opinion. Large Language Models : Advanced artificial intelligence systems capable of processing and generating human-like text, used for various tasks such as natural language understanding, generation, and translation. Media convergence : The integration of different forms of media content, 188 technologies, and platforms, blurring traditional

boundaries between print, broadcast, and digital Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
media. Misinformation : Inaccurate or misleading information, often spread unintentionally or deliberately, leading to misunderstanding, confusion, or harm. Mode of Production : The methods and processes through which goods or services are produced, distributed, and consumed within an economic system, influencing social relations and power dynamics. Multimedia : The combined use of different forms of media, such as text, images, audio, and video, to convey information or entertainment experiences. Online journalism : The practice of reporting, producing, and disseminating news content through digital platforms, including websites, social media, and mobile applications. Platforms : Digital services or applications that facilitate communication, interaction, or commerce between users, often hosting a variety of content and services. Privacy and security : Concerns and measures related to safeguarding personal data and protecting individuals from unauthorised access, surveillance, or misuse of information. Regulation : Rules, laws, and policies established by governments or other authorities to govern various aspects of society, including media, technology, and commerce. Revenue Models : Strategies and mechanisms through which organisations generate income or profit, including advertising, subscriptions, donations, and sales of goods or services. Search Engine : Techniques and practices aimed at improving a Optimization (SEO) website's visibility and ranking in search engine results, enhancing online discoverability and traffic. Small Language Models : Simplified versions of large language models, designed for specific tasks or applications, with reduced computational requirements and capabilities. Social media : Online platforms and technologies that enable users to create, share, and interact with content and other users, fostering communication, collaboration, and community building.

Analysis of Participation 10.11 FURTHER READING
1) Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide; New York University
Press; Jenkins H, 2004.2) Gruber, H., Haugh, M., & Xie, C. (2023). Recontextualization: Modes, media,
and practices. Frontiers in Communication, 8, 1164897. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcomm.2023.1164897/full
3) New Media - Media Content Production on Multiple Platforms; Krishna Sankar
Kusuma; 2022.4) Nieborg, D. B., Duffy, B. E., & Poell, T. (2020). Studying platforms and cultural
production: Methods, institutions, and practices. Social Media+ Society, 6(3), 2056305120943273. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2056305120943273
5) Making Media Production, Practices, and Professions Edited by Mark Deuze
& Mirjam Prenger, Amsterdam University Press, 2019.6) Schreiber, M., Schwarzenegger, C., & Lohmeier, C. (2024). Historical figures
on Instagram: A typology of themes and modes of representation. New Media & Society, 14614448241237496. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/14614448241237496
7) The Online Journalism Handbook: Skills to survive and thrive in the digital age;
Longman Practical Journalism Series; Paul Bradshaw; 2017.8) Watts, D. J., Rothschild, D. M., & Mobius, M. (2021). Measuring the news
and its impact on democracy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(15), e1912443118.10.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1:
1. The mode of production in cyberspace refers to the economic and social
structures governing the creation and distribution of digital goods and services. It encompasses the mechanisms through which value is generated, exchanged, and controlled within online environments, including platforms, algorithms, and user interactions. This mode is characterised by digital technologies' impact on traditional production methods, leading to new forms of labour, consumption, and power dynamics.
2. Online journalism's mode of production comprises several key elements, including
digital platforms, content creation tools, distribution networks, and audience engagement mechanisms. These elements facilitate the creation, dissemination, and consumption of news in digital formats, shaping the workflow and practices of journalists and media organisations. Additionally, factors like data analytics, monetization strategies, and social media integration play crucial roles in shaping online journalism's production dynamics.

3. Online journalism faces various challenges stemming from the digital environment's Mode of Production
in Cyberspace
complexities and evolving nature. These challenges include issues related to information overload, fake news proliferation, audience fragmentation, and platform dependence. Additionally, concerns regarding digital privacy, algorithmic bias, and revenue sustainability pose significant hurdles for media organisations operating in the online sphere. Moreover, the rapid pace of technological change necessitates continuous adaptation and innovation to maintain relevance and credibility in online journalism. Check Your Progress 2:
1. Modes of production encompass key features defining how goods and services
are produced in societies. They include factors like ownership of the means of production, division of labour, and relationship between producers. Centralised planning, market-driven competition, and mixed economies are examples. These features shape economic structures and social relations, impacting distribution of wealth and power within societies.
2. Digital technology profoundly influences new modes of production by
revolutionising production processes, facilitating automation, and enabling remote work. It fosters collaborative networks, empowers individual creators, and disrupts traditional business models through platforms and sharing economies. Moreover, it accelerates innovation cycles, challenges intellectual property norms, and raises questions about labour rights and digital inequalities amidst the rise of gig economies and algorithmic management. Check Your Progress 3:
1. In the digital era, journalists must acquire skills in multimedia storytelling to engage
diverse audiences effectively. Additionally, proficiency in data analysis enables them to uncover meaningful insights from vast amounts of information. Lastly, mastering social media and online community management is essential for reaching and interacting with audiences in real-time.
2. Facebook and Twitter are prominent digital platforms that facilitate communication
and information sharing. Facebook serves as a hub for social interactions, news dissemination, and community building, while Twitter is renowned for its role in breaking news, public discourse, and fostering global conversations.
3. Data journalism involves the collection, analysis, and presentation of data to
uncover compelling stories and provide insights into complex issues. In today's media landscape, where vast amounts of data are generated daily, data journalism plays a crucial role in enhancing transparency, holding institutions accountable, and providing audiences with evidence-based reporting, thus contributing to a more informed and empowered society.

Introduction : Anyalysis of
UNIT 11 IDEOLOGY AND DIGITAL
Participation
COMMUNICATION
Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 Defining Ideology
11.3 Ideologies in Digital Spheres
11.4 Persuasive Technology
11.5 Bubbles, Echo Chambers, Biases, and Other Concerns
11.6 Case Studies
11.7 Future of Civic Discourse
11.8 Let Us Sum Up
11.9 Keywords
11.10 Further Readings
11.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
11.0 INTRODUCTION
Digital communication doesn't happen in isolation. It is shaped by an ideology, a world outlook that helps people understand the world and its ways from a particular perspective. This lesson deals with the critical relationship between ideology and digital communication. Ideology is a system of values, ideas and beliefs that drives people's understanding of the world. Ideology determines content planning, production, distribution, and consumption. While ideologies influence content development and consumption and the dynamics of digital platforms, digital technologies and platforms help disseminate ideologies. Understanding the underlying ideologies in communication and their impact would help comprehend how different perspectives are expressed, shared, and debated online. It would also help explain how certain opinions are amplified or not reflected well on various digital platforms. By understanding the interplay between ideology and digital communication, students will get insights into how digital technology platforms promote certain views and contribute to the polarisation of opinions. It will also help understand how echo chambers are created, how algorithms determine content distribution, and the challenges involved. You will learn about the role of algorithms and recommendation systems based on content consumption patterns. You will also learn how certain views are amplified, and digital platforms act as gatekeepers. You will explore how ideological polarisation happens in cyberspace, how it could lead to echo chambers, and how opinions and beliefs are reinforced. It will also focus on how public discourses get polarised. You will understand various ideologies and digital technology platforms that influence content production, distribution, and consumption by studying these aspects.
192 Proliferate and interact within the digital landscape.

11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Communication After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Understand ideologies and their role in shaping digital content development, distribution, and consumption. Understand various ideologies, such as nationalism, libertarianism, socialism, and consumerism, and how they manifest in cyberspace. Discuss the influence of digital technology platforms on promoting these ideologies and some specific views that reflect them. Explain on the polarisation of views and their impact on public debate.
11.2 DEFINING IDEOLOGY
Ideology is a system of values, principles, and beliefs that helps people understand and interpret the world, including its social, political, and cultural aspects. It does the same thing in digital communication. However, it functions differently because of the digital world's special characteristics. Ideology determines what kind of information people are exposed to, how they engage with content in general and information in particular, how they convey their opinions, and how they interact with the world. To understand how ideologies shape how information is produced, shared, and consumed through digital platforms and online networks, a person's ideological perspective would influence his or her content generation agenda, the people they talk to for information, and the tone and tenor of their discussions on various digital platforms. Ideological biases can reflect on technological algorithms, promoting certain content that is positive to one ideology and muffling content belonging to ideologies that don't go well with the algorithms. This will significantly impact the visibility, availability, and accessibility of certain viewpoints.
11.3 IDEOLOGIES IN DIGITAL SPHERES
Like in the physical world, where people believing in different ideologies spread their ideas through different means (books, articles, speeches, and movements), the digital space is also a place to spread one's opinions based on certain ideologies and use different technological platforms to explain the world in their respective outlooks. These ideologies are reflected in various ways, using digital communication tools to hold discussions and form opinions. Let's explore the ideologies shaping the world's opinions and how they could influence digital communication discussions and campaigns. Liberalism: This ideology protects individuals' rights, such as the right to life, liberty and property, freedom of expression, equality before the law, and implementing the rule of law. It believes in limited government. 193

Analysis of Participation In digital communication, people who believe in liberalism support social justice causes, defend the fundamental rights of individuals, promote inclusive language and representation, and advocate digital privacy rights. They create dedicated websites, use social media platforms, and participate in online campaigns supporting the causes to promote liberal views. They also quickly take to social media when liberal views are attacked. They also join international campaigns and organisations that align with their views. Digital technologies and platforms allowed them to connect with like-minded people from all over the world. Feminism: Feminism is an ideology that defends women's rights and fights against all forms of oppression and discrimination against women. Feminists feel that women face discrimination at different layers - in their workspaces, roads, and houses. They fight against sexual exploitation, lower wages for women, violence against girl children and gender biases in the workplace. Feminist movements and worldwide campaigns have resulted in several pro-women policies and laws that protect women's rights women's rights. For example, the Government enacted the Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition, and Redressal) Act in 2013, which mandates all organisations to set up an Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) to protect women from sexual harassment. All organisations that employ ten or more employees must form a committee to protect the rights of women employees. The National Commission for Women (NCW), a Central Government organisation, can take suo moto actions against acts of violence and oppression in any part of the country. Feminists take an active role in protecting women's rights in the digital space. They use digital technologies and platforms efficiently to defend these rights, highlight issues, and gather support for different causes. They also join international online communities and groups to promote awareness of the rights of women and girl children. They, however, face challenges like trolling and online abuse. Some women's organisations and activists fight such attacks, defending their right to speak to support women's rights. Capitalism: Capitalism is an ideology that advocates economic growth through private ownership and free markets. It advocates policies and laws that create an environment favourable for investments and the smooth functioning of factories. It also wants Governments to provide incentives and special schemes to promote investments, entrepreneurship, and digital marketplaces (such as Amazon and Flipkart). In the digital space, the supporters of capitalism propagate views that promote the ideology. They invest in media organisations which build public opinion in support of policies that support capitalism. They use virtual platforms such as Facebook, X (formerly Twitter), LinkedIn, Zoom and Teams and organise conferences and debates to discuss government policies and economic issues.

Communism: Communication Communism is an ideology that advocates a classless society where a nation's financial and economic resources are owned collectively and distributed based on one's needs. It believes in a government-owned and administered by workers and farmers. They oppose capitalism, which supports a pro-industry form of governance. In the digital space, people who believe in communism use online forums and platforms to promote Communist principles and engage in discussions with those who oppose it. They also set up online groups, resources, and websites to champion their cause. Dictatorship: A dictatorship is a form of government in which an individual, a group of individuals, or an Army takes full control and dictates how it should be run. It believes in centralised authority, censorship, surveillance, restriction on freedom of expression, and other fundamental rights. In the digital space, dictators take control and decide what sort of online resources should be available to people. They monitor various digital technologies to monitor people's online activities and take immediate action to express views against dictatorship. They resort to online propaganda in support of the government and its policies. Digital spaces are under the complete control of governments run by dictators. Socialism: Socialism is an ideology that advocates equitable distribution of wealth, opportunities, and resources. They oppose the domination of a few individuals or corporate houses and respect people's fundamental rights. They promote collective farming and collective ownership of factories. In digital spaces, people who believe in this ideology promote the basic tenets of socialism, including freedom of expression. They try to build consensus on policies and laws that uphold individuals' rights, build digital resources and communities to promote awareness and oppose attempts to silence voices. Nationalism: Nationalism is an ideology that takes pride in a nation's history and culture. It tries to unite the people of a country by strongly promoting national pride and invoking historical attempts to undermine its prestige. They oppose all other ideologies, which, they think, are detrimental to the nation's interests. In the digital space, they use digital technologies and platforms to rally around people in favour of nationalism. They build online communities and resources to spread messages in support of nationalism. They use messenger platforms like WhatsApp and social media platforms like Facebook and YouTube to create content and spread it among their followers, who, in turn, would share it with their friends. 195

Analysis of Participation Check Your Progress: 1
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Name three ideologies and explain the key features.

2. What is meant by bubbles, echo chambers and biases?

3. What are the key concerns about bubbles, echo chambers and biases?

11.4 PERSUASIVE TECHNOLOGIES
Digital technologies and platforms can influence people's opinions, beliefs, habits, and attitudes. These are called Persuasive technologies, which include various tools, platforms, and solutions. These techniques can be used for both good and bad purposes. They can be used to inform and educate people on various topics and issues by creating engaging and interactive content. They also can be used to manipulate the target audience by feeding them with highly opinionated and biased content. Social media: Social media are digital platforms such as Facebook, YouTube, WhatsApp, Instagram, Reels, and blogs that play an important role in shaping people's opinions. They spread information, opinionated articles, and visual content to influence and reinforce people's views on various issues. Advertising: Advertising promotes products, services, and opinions. Corporate and political organisations use a variety of advertising platforms to share attractive product promotion content. They use celebrities and other influencers in targeted advertisements to spread the message. They use platforms and algorithms to create targeted digital advertising campaigns. They can tailor advertisements based on age, language, gender, financial status, caste, and religion. Propaganda: Propaganda is creating and promoting content to a particular viewpoint. In this form, organisations, political parties, and governments deploy curated content and distribute it using online channels. This biased content influences people favouring 196 a particular ideology, party, or organisation.

Gamification: This technique creates engaging content to persuade users to consume Ideology and Digital Communication it. It uses attractive visuals, multimedia content, and interactive techniques to keep users hooked to the content. While there are various persuasive methods in the digital space, there are a few theories about how these methods work. The list includes Captology (computers as persuasive technologies), Nudge theory, the influence of default settings on digital devices, and the Unintended Psychological Effects of Data Structuring and Display. Captology: Researchers say computers can persuade users to change their opinions, form opinions on various issues, and persuade them to act in a particular direction. Computers can also motivate people, help them learn new things, and raise awareness of environmental issues, healthcare, politics, science, poverty, and the economy. Unintended Effects: While targeted attempts to influence people are one form of persuasion, there are specific cascading effects or unintentional uses, too. For example, stories about philanthropy and animal rights would indirectly inspire people. The positive attitude thus created may not reflect immediately, but people will be convinced to believe in something after seeing the positive results. Captology discusses how technological solutions can be carefully designed to bring about positive attitudes and thinking. Digital technologies and platforms can influence and encourage users to do good. They can also help increase their awareness of various issues. However, these can influence people negatively, drive them to do something harmful and bring disharmony to society. Nudge Theory: As the name suggests, in media studies, the Nudge Theory discusses how gentle nudging can bring about small positive changes in the behaviour and thinking of audiences. It discusses how subtle design choices in media platforms, messaging, and content presentation can influence people's behaviours and decisions. It takes cues from behavioural economics and psychology to build the argument. Specific nudge techniques, such as prompts, default settings, and suggestions based on algorithmic observations, can be used to 'nudge' the user's behaviour in digital spaces. Default settings in smartphones, laptops, desktops, and tablets are one example of how nudging happens. By offering specific tools and apps (applications), the default settings make the users use them and get influenced or prompted by the content offered in such apps and tools (pre-installed payment apps, news aggregators, messaging apps and productivity tools such as PDF readers). There is a chance that users will go back to such tools and apps repeatedly. These default settings can have positive and negative impacts. They can limit a user's experience and view. 197

11.5 BUBBLES, ECHO CHAMBERS, BIASES,
AND OTHER CONCERNS
Ideologies keep people in isolated groups, giving them a limited view. Only certain ideologies allow people to consider and respect the views of people who believe in other ideologies. Ideologies not open to studying and discussing newer ideas and opinions tend to keep people with certain biases. They keep people in echo chambers and bubbles, not exposing them to explore diversified views. This is a major concern in digital communication as it can lead to a polarised world with low tolerance for views that oppose one's views. Biases: Biases are not something new in media in the physical world. It is influenced by factors such as - rich and poor, gender, language differences, colour, literacy, and religion. These biases continue to reflect in the digital space. Biases on digital platforms could be more pronounced, as these platforms can enforce them more effectively than in the physical world. Biases are based on ideologies and the respective world outlooks that these ideologies propose. The scope for polarisation (pro or against a view or opinion) is very high in digital spaces, as the voices with neutral opinions are either subdued or silenced. Platforms (such as Facebook, Google, YouTube, and other social media platforms) promote biases in several ways as they try to personalise content offerings based on user's location, browsing history, preferences of friends, language, and nationality. This will lead to echo chambers, where users are exposed to certain content. This, in turn, would promote polarisation, removing the scope for diversified views. Bubbles: In the digital space, a bubble is a phenomenon where people are continuously exposed to a limited range of content that subscribes to one ideology. Since people are exposed to a particular perspective, they tend to read and internalise only one perspective while belittling others. Digital platforms, which use artificial intelligence and machine learning-based algorithms, fuel this phenomenon as they grasp user preferences and promote content that aligns with user preferences. They also make specific news reports and videos go viral, bombarding the users with the viral content. On other occasions, they deliberately promote certain content based on advertisers' preferences. This technological determination has both positive and negative consequences. While it helps users find relevant information that they like, it can bombard them with only one perspective. Echo chambers: Echo chambers are like bubbles. They are online communities or social media groups (Facebook, WhatsApp, and X) where like-minded people exchange ideas and reports to reinforce their views. They don't allow others who might have different 198 views, and they will not tolerate any view that goes against theirs.

Beyond these groups and communities, they support their 'friends' when they face Communication difficulties in online or social media discussions. They express their solidarity by joining the conversations and lending a helping hand. They amplify their echo chambers 'challenging content' to elicit more support. This, in turn, will create an endless chain in which the users of a particular echo chamber continuously reinforce their views. This tendency leads to polarisation, where two groups fight with one another, removing the scope for neutral and diversified views. People within bubbles and echo chambers will be less receptive to alternative viewpoints, causing damage to freedom of expression and scientific temperament. They reinforce deep-rooted biases. Misinformation: In the digital space, misinformation is a major challenge. Some unscrupulous elements deliberately create fake news and misinformation, distorting facts, and other developments to defend one's ideology. Once it is disseminated in social media and other online channels, it goes to many people, who tend to 'forward' such messages intentionally or unintentionally. Many people don't know whether a particular message is factual or fabricated. Since they get it in a social media group (ex, WhatsApp, or Telegram), they believe it is true and forward it to others, thinking they are doing some social service. Misinformation and fake news are created deliberately to gain financial, political, or cultural gains. They are used to create differences in societies and communities by spreading wrong information, doctored images or videos and highly opinionated content. Deep Fakes: Deepfakes are a kind of misinformation to mislead people. By using publicly available audio, images and videos of celebrities and political leaders, cyber criminals manipulate original audio files, images and videos and create new files that appear to be genuine. They use advanced technological solutions and artificial intelligence to doctor the original content. The new files can depict people saying or doing things they never actually did. The recent example of a deep fake video of a South Indian film actress shows how dangerous this phenomenon is. Using this digital technology, one can make a video or an image that can completely tarnish the image of a celebrity or a politician. It can manipulate people's opinions and create differences among communities and countries. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you understand by Persuasive Technologies?

2. What is the future of civic discourse in the digital space?

11.6 CASE STUDIES
When you buy a phone, you must notice that a set of apps has already been installed. Identify those apps (Ex, Facebook, Telegram, Gmail, YouTube, Calendar, etc.) and note the apps you have used to Loto the services. Also, identify the apps that you have not used at all and make a list of such apps. Have you used any productivity apps (ex, alarm, calculator, and GPS)? Are you a member of any Facebook Community or a WhatsApp group exclusively meant for an ideology you subscribe to?
11.7 FUTURE OF CIVIC DISCOURSE
This is an important issue that requires serious thinking and discussion. Discourses in the digital space should be democratic and allow for divergent views. At present, discourses, and interactions on digital platforms such as Facebook and X (Twitter) are highly polarised, with limited scope for people with neutral views or views that slightly deviate from the two diametrically opposing views are minimal. People who express a view that opposes a popular view are being trolled. They face abuse and harsh criticism, forcing them to keep silent or hold back their views. Discrimination is also seen based on language, religion, food habits, culture, nationality, and castes. Geopolitical issues also divide people in the digital space. The scope for civic discourse, where people can freely express their opinions, is limited. However, the potential for civic communication is immense, as digital technologies and platforms have democratised the ability to publish. People with smartphones can post their opinions and comments on any topic--a facility not available before the advent of the Internet. Digital communication promotes healthy discussions and interactions on digital platforms. It also provides opportunities for people with diverse opinions to express themselves and present their points of view, allowing even people from marginalised communities to participate in public discourses without fear.

Moreover, they can immediately draw support from like-minded people across Communication different geographies. Since digital communication connects people across geographies and linguistic barriers, people can access online resources to learn more and actively participate in discussions on various platforms. Regulation This, however, calls for regulation to protect people's interests from marginalised communities and underprivileged sections. Perpetual abuse and trolling must be checked, and action must be taken against the offenders spoiling the environment. Media regulation will also help address misinformation, hate speech, privacy violations, and digital exclusion. Digital literacy To achieve this, people need to be educated and spread digital literacy. They should also be educated on how to tackle misinformation and fake news. If they can distinguish between factual and fake news, they will know what posts can be shared with others and what posts need to be questioned. Many unintentionally become part of 'bubbles' and 'echo chambers' and participate in uncivilised and undemocratic discussions. Exposure to good practices and teaching how to behave responsibly in digital public discourses will help create a healthy digital space that facilitates civic discourses.
11.8 LET US SUM UP
Ideologies are the means through which people understand the world. A variety of ideologies are practised across the world. Like in the physical world, ideologies influence people's thinking and content consumption behaviour in the digital space. People use digital technologies and platforms to promote their points of view and defend their perspectives based on different digital platforms. Influence what information people consume, how they participate in online discussions, and ultimately their worldview. Digital technologies and platforms are called 'persuasive technologies' as they are used to convince, encourage, or persuade people to believe in or do something. Digital communication employs techniques to influence users' opinions and behaviours subtly. Social media algorithms curate content and suggest 'relevant' content to people based on content consumption patterns. They also promote content that goes viral on various digital platforms. Sometimes, some platforms deliberately promote content that reflects a particular ideology. Other techniques, such as 'nudge theory' and default settings, encourage people to consume content in a particular way. These persuasive techniques create bubbles, echo chambers and biases. This results in the polarisation of people in the digital space, restricting people to thinking narrowly. It kills divergent views and perspectives, leaving little or no scope for pluralistic views.

Analysis of Participation While digital platforms have the potential to encourage diverse viewpoints and healthy debate, they also present challenges such as bubbles, digital echo chambers, misinformation, privacy, and biases. To promote pluralistic views, regulation is needed to protect the users from abuse, trolling, misinformation and erosion of privacy and trust. There is a need to promote digital literacy to educate people on different dimensions of digital communication and the need to respect the views of others.
11.9 KEYWORDS
Algorithms : A set of instructions or rules followed by a computer program to solve a problem or perform a task, often used to process data, and make decisions. Biases : Preconceived notions or preferences that affect judgement and decision-making, often leading to unfair treatment or inaccurate conclusions. Capitalism : An economic system characterised by private ownership of the means of production, profit-driven markets, and competition, where goods and services are exchanged in a free market. Cryptology : The study of techniques for secure communication in the presence of third parties, encompassing both cryptography (encryption and decryption) and cryptanalysis (breaking codes). Civic engagement : Active participation of individuals in their communities and society, often involving actions such as voting, volunteering, and advocacy for social or political causes. Communism : A socio-economic system advocating for common ownership of the means of production, distribution of resources based on need, and the absence of social classes. Consumerism : A social and economic ideology that encourages the acquisition of goods and services in large quantities, often equating consumption with happiness or social status. Deep Fakes : AI-generated hyper-realistic digital content, such as images, videos, or audio recordings, often used to deceive or manipulate viewers by portraying false information or events. Default settings : The preset configurations or options chosen by manufacturers or developers for a device, software, or platform, which users can modify according to 202 their preferences.

Dictatorship : A form of government where power is concentrated Communication in the hands of a single individual or a small group, often characterised by authoritarian rule and limited political freedoms. Digital communication : The exchange of information, ideas, and messages through electronic means, such as the Internet, email, social media, and digital devices. Digital platforms : Online frameworks or services that facilitate interactions, transactions, or content sharing among users, such as social media networks, e-commerce websites, and streaming platforms. Digital technologies : Tools, systems, or applications based on digital electronics, including computers, smartphones, software, and Internet-connected devices. Discourse : Communication or conversation, often involving the exchange of ideas, opinions, and arguments on a particular topic or issue within a specific context. Display effects : The impact or influence of how information is presented or visually displayed, affecting perceptions, attitudes, and behaviours of individuals. Echo chambers : Information environments where individuals are exposed only to perspectives and opinions that reinforce their existing beliefs, leading to the amplification of ideological biases. Fake news : False or misleading information presented as legitimate news, often spread intentionally to deceive, or manipulate audiences for various purposes. Feminism : A socio-political movement advocating for the equality of the sexes and the dismantling of gender- based discrimination and oppression. Filter bubbles : Online information ecosystems where individuals are selectively exposed to content based on algorithms or personal preferences, potentially limiting exposure to diverse viewpoints. Gamification : The application of game design elements and principles in non-game contexts to engage and motivate users to achieve specific goals or behaviours. Ideology : A system of beliefs, values, or principles that guide and influence an individual's or group's actions, often shaping political, social, and cultural perspectives.

Analysis of Participation Influence : The capacity or power to affect the thoughts, actions, or behaviours of others, often through persuasion, coercion, or social pressure. International Complaints : A body or organisation responsible for addressing Committee grievances or disputes on an international scale, often related to human rights violations or cross-border conflicts. Liberalism : A political and philosophical ideology emphasise individual rights, civil liberties, free markets, and limited government intervention in social and economic affairs. Manipulation : The act of influencing or controlling someone or something in a deceptive or cunning manner to achieve one's own goals or interests. Misinformation : False or inaccurate information that is unintentionally disseminated, often leading to misunderstandings or misconceptions. Nationalism : A political ideology emphasising loyalty, pride, and devotion to one's nation, often accompanied by a sense of superiority over other nations. National Commission : A government agency or body tasked with for Women addressing issues related to women's rights, gender equality, and empowerment within a specific country. Nudge theory : A behavioural economics concept suggesting that individuals can be influenced to make certain decisions or choices through subtle prompts or interventions, without restricting their freedom of choice. Persuasive technology : Technology designed to influence attitudes, behaviours, or decisions of users through persuasive techniques, such as feedback, rewards, or social influence. Platforms : Digital or online frameworks that enable users to access, interact with, or contribute content, services, or applications, often facilitating communication, collaboration, or commerce. Propaganda : Information, ideas, or messages deliberately spread to influence opinions, attitudes, or behaviours, often with a political, ideological, or persuasive agenda. Social media : Online platforms and websites that enable users to create, share, and interact with content and other users, fostering virtual communities and social networking.

Socialism : A socio-economic system advocating for collective Communication or state ownership of the means of production, distribution of resources based on contribution, and social equality. Trolling : Deliberately provocative or disruptive behaviour online, often characterised by posting inflammatory or offensive comments to provoke reactions or sow discord.
11.10 FURTHER READING
1. Bartlett, J. (2018). The People vs Tech: How the Internet is Killing Democracy
(and How We Save It).
2. Chomsky, N. (1988). Manufacturing consent: The political economy of the mass
media. Pantheon.
3. Couldry, N. (2012). Media, society, world: Social theory and digital media
practice. Polity Press.
4. Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide.
NYU Press.
5. Jenkins, H. (2008). Fans, bloggers, and gamers: Exploring participatory culture.
NYU Press.
6. Morozov, E. (2011). The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom.
7. O'Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases
inequality and threatens democracy. Crown.
8. Pariser, E. (2012). The filter bubble: How the new personalised web changes
what we read and think. Penguin Books.
9. Zuboff, S. (2019). The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human
Future at the New Frontier of Power.
11.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1:
1. Three ideologies are liberalism, conservatism, and socialism. Liberalism emphasises
individual rights, limited government intervention, and free market economics. Conservatism prioritises tradition, social stability, and limited governmental change. Socialism advocates for collective ownership of resources, wealth redistribution, and social welfare programs.
2. Bubbles refer to personalised online environments where users are
exposed only to content that aligns with their existing beliefs, reinforcing those beliefs. Echo chambers are spaces where individuals interact predominantly with like- minded people, amplifying their beliefs and isolating them from dissenting viewpoints. Biases are cognitive tendencies 205

Introduction : Analysis of that influence perception and decision-making, such as confirmation bias, which Participation leads individuals to favour information confirming their preconceptions.
3. Key concerns about bubbles, echo chambers, and biases include their potential
to polarise society, hinder critical thinking, and reinforce misinformation. They can lead to the spread of extremist views, reduce exposure to diverse perspectives, and undermine democratic discourse by limiting meaningful dialogue and understanding between individuals with differing opinions. Additionally, they may exacerbate social divisions and impede efforts to address complex societal issues through collaborative problem-solving. Check Your Progress 2:
1. Persuasive Technologies refer to digital tools and platforms designed to influence
users' attitudes, behaviours, and decision-making processes. These technologies leverage principles from psychology, behavioural economics, and human-computer interaction to encourage specific actions or beliefs. Examples include social media algorithms, personalised advertising, and gamification techniques. Through subtle cues, prompts, and feedback loops, persuasive technologies aim to shape user behaviour towards predetermined goals, such as increasing engagement, promoting product sales, or fostering social change. While these technologies offer opportunities for positive impact, such as promoting health behaviours or environmental sustainability, they also raise concerns about privacy, autonomy, and ethical implications. Thus, understanding the mechanisms behind persuasive technologies is crucial for navigating their effects responsibly in an increasingly digitised society.
2. The future of civic discourse in the digital space holds both promise and challenges.
On one hand, digital platforms offer unprecedented opportunities for diverse voices to engage in public discourse, democratising access to information and facilitating grassroots activism. Citizens can connect, organise, and mobilise around social and political issues with greater speed and reach than ever before. However, this landscape is also marred by misinformation, echo chambers, and polarisation, fuelled by algorithmic biases and online anonymity. Addressing these challenges requires concerted efforts to promote media literacy, foster digital citizenship, and regulate platforms to uphold democratic values. Additionally, promoting inclusive and equitable participation in digital civic spaces is crucial to ensure that marginalised voices are heard and respected. Ultimately, the future of civic discourse in the digital space hinges on our ability to harness technology for constructive dialogue, collective action, and democratic governance.

UNIT 12 SEMIOTICS AND DIGITAL
Communication
COMMUNICATION
Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 Digital Semiotics
12.2.1 Multi Model Semiotics
12.2.2 Social Semiotics
12.3 Key concepts of semiotics in digital communication
12.3.1 Signs
12.3.2 Signifier
12.3.4 Signified
12.3.5 Signification
12.3.6 Codes
12.3.7 Interpretation
12.4 Principles of Semiotics
12.5 Application of Semiotics in Digital Communication
12.5.1 Branding and Marketing
12.5.2 Digital Storytelling
12.5.3 Social Media Analysis
12.5.4 User Experience Design
12.6 Examples of Semiotics in Digital Communication
12.6.1 Emojis
12.6.2 Button Icon
12.6.3 Meme
12.6.4 Logo
12.6.5 Hashtag
12.7 Designing a Semiotic Study
12.7.1 Identification of Problem
12.7.2 Rationale for selecting the topic
12.7.3 Research Methodology and Data Collection
12.7.4 Analysis
12.7.5 Findings and Conclusion
12.8 Let Us Sum Up
12.9 Keywords
12.10 Further Readings
12.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
12.0 INTRODUCTION
Semiotics is the study of signs and symbols and their use in communication. In digital communication, semiotics plays a crucial role in understanding how signs and symbols

Analysis of Participation are used in various digital platforms such as social media, websites, and digital advertising. One of its founders first defined semiotics, the Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure. Although the word was used in this sense in the 17th century by John Locke, semiotics as a tool of analysis was first defined by Saussure. In the late 19th century, American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce brought pragmatism and logic to semiotic analysis. One of his major contributions to semiotics was categorising signs into three main types: Icon, Index and Symbol. We will discuss it later in this chapter. Digital semiotics explores how digital media and communication technologies shape our understanding of the world around us. It is an interdisciplinary field that draws on theories from linguistics, philosophy, psychology, and other disciplines to explore how digital communication changes how we think, communicate, and interact. Semiotics help analyse how meaning is created and conveyed through digital communication, including emojis, hashtags, memes, and other visual and textual elements. Some key research areas in digital semiotics include discourse analysis, social semiotics, and digital methods. Discourse analysis studies how different modes of communication, such as text, image, and sound, work together to create meaning. Social semiotics concerns how social and cultural factors shape the production and interpretation of signs and symbols. Digital methods use digital tools and techniques to analyse and interpret semiotic data. Digital semiotics is an exciting and rapidly evolving field that has the potential to shed new light on how we communicate and understand the world around us.
12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Understand the core concepts of semiotics and explore different theoretical framework; Analyse the relationship between technology and meaning; Develop critical thinking skills and apply semiotic tools to analyse digital content critically; and Analyse digital communication using semiotic analysis methodologies systematically.
12.2 DIGITAL SEMIOTICS
Semiotics is the study of signs and symbols and their use or interpretation. It explores how meaning is created and communicated through signs, which can be anything from words and images to sounds and gestures. Semiotics is an interdisciplinary field that draws on linguistics, philosophy, psychology, anthropology, and other related fields.

Semiotics is concerned with how signs convey meaning in different contexts and Semiotics and Digital Communication cultures. It examines how signs are created, interpreted, and communicated ideas, emotions, and values. Semiotics is also concerned with how signs construct identity, shape social relations, and influence behaviour. The age of new media, which has become an important communication tool, has expanded the horizon of semiology. Traditional signs have expanded, and new signs have emerged, as seen in new media platforms. Signs like emojis, memes, virtual avatars, and many interactive interfaces create new meanings, and semiological analysis also includes these signs. Digital semiotics is an interdisciplinary field that explores the relationship between digital technology and semiotics, the study of signs and symbols and their use or interpretation. It combines semiotics with digital humanities, computer science, and other fields. Digital semiotics is concerned with how digital technology has changed how we communicate and interpret signs and symbols in the digital world. New media provides multimedia content in which text, images, and audio/video blend into one to convey a single message. Semiologists are now analysing how these diverse elements interact and contribute to meaning. For example, a meme provides a message by bringing humour to the content. Semiology can study how these memes are creating new meaning. In traditional media, users consume messages passively, while new media focuses on interactivity and participation. In new media, users change their role as receivers several times and become creators of the messages. They also comment, like, and share the content. Semiologists are exploring how user interactivity and participation affect content creation and interpretation of meaning.
12.2.1 Multimodal Semiotics
The rise of new media has changed the field of communication. New media has made communication more dynamic and vibrant. In traditional media, consumers are passive receivers of messages, but in new media, they are not passive receivers but active participants in content creation. In traditional media, consumers can access information through one medium. For example, newspapers and magazines can get information only through text; on the radio, they have audio only; on television, they get information through audio/visual mediums. TV as a medium has multimedia capability to integrate text into news presentations. But TV also has some limitations. New media has brought all these mediums together with some added features of interactivity and participation. To understand the complex meaning created by this multimedia presentation, multimodal semiology provides a fascinating field that studies how meaning is woven through the diverse elements of digital communication. Gone are the days when a singular medium was used to deliver meaning. Now, text, images, sounds, animations, emojis and interactive elements all play a crucial role in delivering meaning to the consumers. Multimodal semiology considers the following elements of new media:
1. Visuals: Visual elements of new media content convey information beyond
words. Images, GIFs, and videos provide new meaning to the written text and invoke emotions in the story. A single image can tell a story more clearly than a thousand words. Similarly, a well-timed animation can easily explain complex concepts.

Analysis of Participation 2. Sounds provide clarity and authenticity and add new value to written information. Music, sound effects, and even silence affect a message's emotional and cognitive impact. A haunting melody can set the mood for a horror film, while a playful jingle can make an ad instantly memorable.
3. Interactivity: New media does not promote receiving messages passively;
it invites user participation. Users are no longer passive recipients; they are active participants. Liking, sharing, and commenting are all part of the meaning-making process. For example, more liked and shared content gives meaning to the content.
4. Emojis: Emojis have become a new language of communication. An emoji
can send a message more clearly and with brevity than written words. For example, a smiley can impact the receiver more than writing. I am happy. These emojis add emoticons to the message. These emojis have multiple meanings depending on the circumstances. A simple smile can be interpreted as happy, but it can also be taken as sarcastic if used that way. Multimodal semiology equips us with the tools to decode the complex messages delivered by new media. By analysing diverse signs, platforms, and user interactions, we can become more informed and critical information consumers in a world where meaning is no longer confined to the written word. Multimodal semiology can be used to analyse the meaning of posts, memes, and other content on social media platforms. It can help us understand how different modes, such as hashtags, emojis, and visuals, contribute to constructing meaning and identity.
12.2.2 Social Semiotics
Social semiology studies the social and cultural aspects of signs and symbols. It is focused on how people use signs and symbols in their communication and create meaning in their social and cultural contexts. The terms "social semiotics" and "social semiology" are used interchangeably, but both terms have some differences. Social semiotics focuses on the social construction of meaning through signs and symbols. On the other hand, Social semiology emphasises the system of signs within a society and how these systems evolved. Social semiotics is more interested in knowing how social structures, power dynamics and ideologies influence how signs are used and interpreted. Social semiology focuses on the underlying codes and rules that govern sign production and interpretation within a specific cultural context. However, the core idea of both concepts is that meaning is not inherent in signs themselves but rather arises from their use and interpretation within a particular social and cultural context. These concepts provide powerful tools for analysing various phenomena, from everyday interactions to mass media communication. The core concepts of social semiology are different from those of traditional semiology. Traditional semiology believes that meaning is inherent in signs, but social semiology focuses on meaning actively constructed in a social and cultural context. It assumes that the meaning of a sign is not fixed; it keeps changing as social and cultural contexts change. For example, a smiley can be seen positively in informal communication, whereas in formal communication, it might be seen as sarcastic. Social semiotics also focus on power dynamics and ideological forces 210 in society, which influence the production and interpretation of signs. For example,

different social groups use symbols, images, and language to mark their identities Semiotics and Digital Communication and claim authority. Digital technologies have transformed how people send and receive messages, creating a new form of social and cultural expression. There are various ways to apply social semiotics to study the construction of meaning through digital platforms. One way is to analyse how people use signs and symbols like hashtags, emojis, images, and audio/visuals to create meaning and express themselves. Another way is to apply social semiology to how meaning is constructed using specific symbols for specific purposes and widely circulated throughout the culture. Social semiotics/semiology can be applied to new media in the following ways:
1. Analysing social media platforms: Examining how design features,
algorithms, and user interactions shape meaning making and identity construction.
2. Deconstructing memes: Understanding how shared symbols, references,
and humour function within specific online communities.
3. Studying the circulation of news: Analysing how narratives are constructed,
contested, and spread online.
4. Examining the role of emojis and other elements: Unpacking the social
and cultural meanings embedded in visual and non-verbal communication. Like multimodal semiology, social semiotics recognise that meaning is constructed through words and multiple modes like images, sounds, gestures, and even silence. Analysing these diverse elements provides a richer understanding of how social interactions produce meaning. Social semiotics is a fascinating field that delves into the intricate relationship between meaning-making, social processes, and signs. It's not just about studying signs and symbols but understanding how they are shaped and used within specific social contexts. By utilising a social semiotic/semiological perspective, we can better understand how communication shapes our experiences and interactions in the digital age. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is discourse analysis?

2. Differentiate between social semiotics and social semiology.

Analysis of
12.3 KEY CONCEPTS OF SEMIOTICS IN DIGITAL
Participation
COMMUNICATION
Semiotics is not about finding one "correct" interpretation but rather about developing a critical and flexible approach to analysing the multiple layers of meaning surrounding us in the digital age. Key concepts of semiology help us gain a deeper understanding of the complex and fascinating world of digital communication.
12.3.1 1 Signs
A sign is something physical, recognisable by our sensory system. It denotes something other than itself. Signs are treated by their users as 'standing for' or representing other things. Take, for example, In the game of cricket, an umpire raises his/her index finger as a sign to a batsman. In this case, the sign refers to 'Out', recognised by the umpire and batsman. This is conveyed from the umpire to the batsman, who must leave the ground. Thus, the communication occurred. Saussure's model of sign, which focused on linguistic signs (such as words), defined a sign as composed of a signifier and a signified. The relationship between the signifier and the signified is called 'signification'.
12.3.2 Signifier
The signifier is commonly interpreted as the physical form of a sign that can be perceived through our senses. It is the sign's image perceived in different forms-- a figure on the paper, sound in the air, or the colour of the traffic lights/signal.
12.3.4 Signified
The signified is the mental image or concept to which it (sign's image) refers. This mental image or concept is common to all members of the same culture who share the same language. A signified should be identified as the 'notion' of a thing, not a thing.
12.3.5 Signification
The relationship between the signifier and the signified is called 'signification'. For illustration, let's take a linguistic example, the word 'DONKEY'. It might be read simply as a word by a child, in which case they become a sign composed of the signifier (their appearance) and the mental concept ('doneness) we have of this animal. Or, in case an annoyed person calls another person with the word 'donkey', it might be read differently (in a negative sense) by the person belonging to a particular culture. This relationship between a child's concept of 'donkeyness' or that annoyed person's notion of 'donkeyness' and the physical reality of a donkey is "signification". Here, the word 'donkeys' should not be treated as literal. It has been used to illustrate the idea. A sign is an identifiable combination of a signifier and a particular signified. The same signifier (the word 'donkey') could represent a different signified (thus be a different sign). For instance, a donkey could stand for the appearance of a particular type of animal, dumbness, or laziness. Therefore, the signification of a donkey is 212 as culture specific as the linguistic form of the signifier in each language.

12.3.6 Codes Semiotics and Digital
Communica tion Codes are the systems into which signs are arranged. These systems provide a framework within which signs make sense. Codes organise signs into meaningful systems which correlate signifiers and signified through the structural forms of syntagms and paradigms. Saussure defined two ways signs are organised into codes- (1) paradigm and (2) syntagm. A paradigm is a set of signs from which the one to be used is selected. Example- The set of 'like' buttons for reacting to any social media post "thumbs up", "Love", "Haha", "Waao", "Sad", or "Angry"- forms a paradigm; so, does the set of emojis that can go within them. Whereas a syntagm is the message into which chosen signs are combined. For example- a particular 'reaction' (maybe 'like' or 'love') to any social media post is a syntagm, a combination of the chosen 'reaction' with the corresponding chosen emojis. For better comprehension, we can say that the vocabulary is the paradigm, and a sentence is a syntagm. So, all messages involve selection (from a paradigm) and combination (into a syntagm). Fundamentally, two paradigms give their names to two types of code: analogue and digital. A digital code is one whose units (both signifiers and signified) are separated or distinct. At the same time, an analogue code works on a continuous scale. A digital speedometer in a bike separates each kilometre per hour speed from the next. An analogue speedometer in old model bikes or scooters has a continuous scale, and it is only by putting marks on the speedometer dial that we can read it "digitally". Digital codes are easier to understand because their units are clearly distinguished. At the same time, all analogue codes are difficult to comprehend. John Fiske put it this way: Nature generally comprises analogue codes. In trying to comprehend or categorise nature, we impose digital differences, such as the "seven ages of man" or intimate, personal, semi-public, and public distances between people. Considering the range, division and sub-division of codes, Daniel Chandler tried to organise the range of typologies of codes based on the most widely mentioned context of media, communication, and cultural studies. He refers to this classification as a tripartite framework.
1. Social Codes
verbal language (phonological, syntactical, lexical, prosodic, and paralinguistic subcodes); bodily codes (bodily codes, proximity, physical orientation, appearance, facial expression, gaze, head nods, gestures, and postures); commodity codes (fashions, clothing, cars); behavioural codes (protocols, rituals, role-playing, games).
2. Textual Codes
scientific codes, including mathematics;

Analysis of Participation aesthetic codes within the various expressive arts (poetry, drama, painting, sculpture, music, etc.), including classicism, romanticism, realism; genre, rhetorical and stylistic codes: exposition, argument, description, narration and so on; Mass media codes, including photographic, televisual, film, radio, newspaper, and magazine codes, are both technical and conventional (including format).
3. Interpretive Codes
perceptual codes: e.g. visual perception Ethical codes include 'encoding' and 'decoding' texts- dominant (or 'hegemonic'), negotiated or oppositional. These three types of codes correspond broadly to three kinds of knowledge required by interpreters of a text, namely knowledge of:
1. the world (social knowledge);
2. the medium and the genre (textual knowledge);
3. the relationship between (1) and (2) (morality judgements).
Codes and conventions are at the heart of any culture's experience. They allow us to understand our social existence and to locate ourselves within our culture. In this context, Fiske says that culture is an active, dynamic, living organism only because of its members' active participation in its communication codes.
12.3.7 Interpretation
Since Saussure's work was primarily oriented towards how signs work, Roland Barthes first developed a systematic model for analysing and interpreting negotiating, interactive ideas of meaning. The core idea of Barthe's theory is the idea of two orders of signification.
1. Denotation
This refers to the sign's literal, common-sense, obvious meaning. It describes the relationship between the signifier and the signified within the sign and between the sign and its referent in external reality. Barthes refers to this order as denotation.
2. Connotation
The term connotation points to the sign's socio-cultural and 'personal' associations (ideological, emotional, etc.). This is when meanings move towards subjectivity. This subjectivity depends on the interpreter's class, age, gender, ethnicity, etc. Connotation is thus context dependent. John Fiske illustrates these two orders of signification by saying, 'denotation is what is photographed; connotation is how it is photographed.' To read the connotative meaning, Barthes introduced ways in which signs work in the second order. Some of them are:

I. Myth--A myth is a culture's narrative that explains or comprehends a
Communication particular facet of nature or reality. According to Barthes, a myth is a culture's method of perceiving or comprehending something. For Barthes, a myth is a series of connected ideas or related concepts. II. Metaphor--Metaphors transform qualities from one plane of reality to another. In semiotic terms, a metaphor involves one signified acting as a signifier referring to a different signified. John Fiske contends that metaphor is a way of disciplining our thinking that is compatible with and part of the ideology of a work-centred, capitalist society. We should pay greater attention to everyday metaphors and the "common" ideas they convey because they are more subtle and ideological than literary ones. III. Metonym--Its basic definition is making a part of the whole. It works by associating meanings within the same plane. A metonym is necessary to depict reality, as we select a portion of "reality" to represent the entire thing. Television crime serials' urban locations are metonyms; a street photographed isn't supposed to represent the street itself only, but rather a specific kind of city life.
12.4 PRINCIPLES OF SEMIOTICS
One of the founders of semiotics, Ferdinand de Saussure, says it is the study of signs within society. The principles of semiotics are concerned with the formulation of messages, transmission of these messages, interpretation of these messages, and, finally, their significance. The principles of semiotics, the study of signs and symbols, provide a framework for understanding how meaning is created and exchanged. There are diverse schools of thought within semiotics; some key principles are the following:
1. Arbitrariness
Saussure believed that the arbitrariness of the sign is a defining characteristic of signs. He challenged the idea of natural or inherent connections between signifier and signified. It means that words or images, signifiers, and their meaning, which are signified, have no natural connection. For example, when we see "cat", this word has no meaning if we remove social context. Because in other languages, the signifier is different, but the signified is the same. Arbitrariness does not say that a signifier has no meaning; it only emphasises social conventions to establish that meaning. Arbitrariness stresses understanding these conventions to understand their meaning. One other semiotician, Michael Halliday, says that we might see some motivation in signifiers; for example, the word "bang" has a certain level of motivation, but that does not negate the fundamental arbitrariness of the sign system.
2. Sign Systems and Codes
Sign System: This is another fundamental principle of semiology. Signs don't exist in isolation, but they operate within networks called sign systems. These systems have a set of related signs governed by internal rules and relationships. To interpret a sign accurately, we need to understand the system it belongs to. Knowing the 215

Analysis of Participation conventions of a specific system equips us to decipher the meaning of individual signs within that system. Sign systems can be diverse, ranging from verbal and visual to non-verbal (gestures) and audio (music). Each system has its own set of rules and conventions that shape how signs function and interact. Codes: Within sign systems, specific rules, known as codes, tell us how signs are combined and interpreted. Depending on the system, these codes can be grammatical, logical, cultural, or aesthetic. Think of traffic signs following a specific code of colour and symbol combinations to convey directions and warnings. Codes are keys to unlocking the meaning embedded within a sign system. By understanding the relevant code, we can decode the messages communicated through the arrangement of signs. We must also remember that codes are not static; they evolve when social and cultural conventions change. Different communities in the same systems may have different code variations, which leads to confusing interpretations and expressions.
3. Intertextuality and Context
Intertextuality and context are crucial principles in semiology. They are vital in interpreting and understanding signs and their meanings. Intertextuality: This concept emphasises that texts don't exist in isolation. They engage with other words to give a meaning. Semiologist Jonathan Culler says that words interact and that meaning making is interconnected. Intertextuality applies to all forms of communication, including visual media, music, and even everyday conversations. Identifying intertextual elements can reveal hidden meanings and cultural references. Another semiologist, John Fiske, says that historical and cultural factors define intertextuality. For example, visual images and photographs can be understood while considering historical and cultural factors. Context: No sign exists in a vacuum; the context always shapes its meaning. It means that in which situation is a particular sign used? Who are the audience, and what is the social and cultural background in which it is used? Context is not one- dimensional, but it has many layers. Think about a political speech by a leader. It has many layers of context, like the political situation in which it is delivered, the intended audience and the set-up in which it is delivered. Context is not static; it is dynamic and keeps evolving as our understanding of the world changes. The thought considered humorous in one context might be considered offensive in another.
4. Dynamism and Evolution
Dynamism: Another important principle of semiology is that signs and systems are dynamic and evolving. New words are coined, the meaning of old words changes, and visual symbols acquire new interpretations. Semiologist Gunther Kress argues that signs and systems are dynamic and natural, and they evolve and adapt in response to social and cultural changes. Bryan S. Turner highlights that meaning is constantly being created and renegotiated through changing norms of society. Changes in social interactions, cultural shifts, and technological advancements further influence the dynamism of signs. Take the example of social media; it has brought new languages, symbols, and communication styles that evolve rapidly. Evolution: Over time, sign systems can undergo profound transformations. These 216 may include a diversion in language, a change in visual styles, or cultural references

that fade into obscurity. Recognising how sign systems evolve provides valuable Communication insights into social transformations. Analysing historical changes in sign systems can provide clues about shifts in power dynamics, ideological movements, and cultural values.
5. Power and Ideology
This principle of semiology focuses on how power and ideology have a more significant influence in constructing the meaning of signs. In his book "Mythologies", Semiologist Roland Barthes deconstructs popular culture and everyday rituals, revealing how they naturalise specific ideologies and power structures. In his book "Critical Studies of Visual Images, "Norman Fairclough examines how visual media reflects and reinforces social inequalities and dominant ideologies. Power and society: To understand the construction of meaning, we must understand the power structure embedded in signs. Powerful groups utilise sign systems to assert their dominance and control. This can be seen in representing certain groups in media or in how public spaces are designed. The power embedded in sign systems tries to naturalise inequality and try to show that this is normal and inevitable. This principle of semiology offers tools to deconstruct power structure and critically analyse meaning. By this, we can question the existing communication system and demand an equitable form of communication. Ideology and constructing meaning: There is a hidden power structure and some hidden values and ideologies in the sign systems. These values and beliefs are the dominant ideology of society. These ideologies can be political, economic, social, or cultural. By decoding this, we can understand the hidden agenda of the communication process. This understanding will help us become active and critical consumers who may resist manipulation and propaganda. We can demand more informed communication and challenge dominant narratives. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Describe Saussure's model of sign.

2. Discuss some key principles of semiotics.

3. Mention the steps for designing a semiotic study.

12.5 APPLICATION OF SEMIOTICS IN DIGITAL
COMMUNICATION
Semiology equips us with the tools to decode the complexity of digital communication. By understanding the signs, social contexts, and power dynamics embedded in digital platforms, we can understand this ever-evolving system with greater awareness, critical thinking, and cultural sensitivity.
12.5.1 Branding and Marketing
In the digital age, where it is very difficult to grab the attention of consumers, brands need to understand their audience deeply and craft messages that impact the audience deeply. This is where semiotics becomes a powerful tool for crafting impactful digital branding and marketing strategies.
1. Understanding your brand
Semiotic analysis of the signs and symbols of your brand, which you will use in branding and marketing, can help you understand the core meaning embedded in your brand. Analysing your logo, colour palette, typography, and tagline through a semiotic lens reveals your brand's deeper values, emotions, and aspirations. This understanding forms the foundation for all your communication efforts across digital platforms.
2. Understanding the audience
Semiotics help you understand the social and cultural values of your target audience. This analysis may help you understand society's current cultural shift or dominant narratives. By analysing online conversations, user-generated content, and social media trends, you can identify the signs and symbols that resonate with your audience and tailor your brand's message accordingly.
3. Creating impactful Content
Once you understand your audience and social and cultural values, you can create an impactful message to promote your brand. You can speak in your audience's language, which may reach their hearts and minds. Choosing the right visuals and sentences and bringing emotions to your message becomes possible through semiotic insights.
4. Building Brand Communities
Digital signs and symbols help in building digital brand communities. By creating engaging hashtags and designing interactive campaigns, semiotic analysis provides innovative ways to create a loyal community for your brand.
12.5.2 Digital Storytelling
Semiotics can help embed messages in digital storytelling to make your digital story more captivating. Semiotics can also help understand users' social and cultural understanding, which will help construct meaning in digital stories.

1. Constructing Signs
Communication Semiotics empower you to examine each layer of meaning in a digital story. You can create a story layer by layer using text, audio/visuals, and pictures. Every element used in a story becomes a sign to be deciphered. Semiological analysis will provide a better understanding of using all these elements impactfully.
2. Understanding the users
Users read your well-crafted story with their own social and cultural context. Semiotics help you to understand your users' perspective on the story. Through this understanding, you can use signs and symbols that are familiar to your users. To give the intended message to your users, semiology can help you bridge the gap between you and your audience.
3. Bringing interactivity
The nature of an interactive platform is interactivity. By bringing interactivity, you can make your digital story more engaging. Semiology helps you understand your audience, which will help you design interactive elements like puzzles, discussion boards, and hashtags to engage your audience more effectively. You can further refine your story by analysing users' interactions.
12.5.3 Social Media Analysis
Social media has become an important platform for sharing emotions, opinions, and information. The amount and variety of content shared on social media sometimes leave everybody puzzled. Semiotics provides very useful tools for understanding the embedded meaning of all these messages. Semiology enables us to understand the complexities of social media discourse.
1. Deciphering the signs
Semiotics help us decipher the message embedded in visuals, emojis, memes, hashtags, and GIFs. They decipher it layer by layer, providing us with cultural codes, emotions, and hidden agendas. This analysis also helps us understand the dominant narrative on social media issues. Semiotics decipher verbal and nonverbal communication elements, which is very helpful in giving a full picture of online communication.
2. Understanding Power Dynamics
Social media is widely used by political parties and multinationals to influence social media users based on their ideologies. Semiotics allows us to analyse the power dynamics manifest on online platforms. It helps us decipher online trends, biased algorithms, and how messages are framed and shared among users. Understanding these dynamics enables us to evaluate messages critically and engage in responsible online dialogue.
3. Tracking Trending Topics and Memes
With the help of semiotics tools, we can track trending topics and memes. We can understand the cultural, social, and political meaning of these trends. By decoding embedded messages through the humour of memes, we can 219

understand the hidden propaganda. We can understand society's symbolism and emotional triggers by semiological analysis of trending or viral topics.
4. Bridging Cultural Gaps
Social media provides a platform where people from different geographical locations and diverse cultural set-ups can interact with each other. As we know, signs and symbols used in communication have a social and cultural context. This context may differ from one culture to another, resulting in the different meanings of shared expressions. Semiology can help decipher these meanings and help understand and appreciate diverse meanings attached to specific signs in different cultures. It can help foster mutual understanding and bridge communication gaps between different communities.
12.5.4 User Experience Design
On digital platforms, users look for user-friendly interfaces. Semiology can help create a highly interactive platform for a better user experience. It helps decode the meaning behind signs. With this understanding, we can create more user-friendly and engaging platforms.
1. User Expectations
Semiology helps to understand the cultural and social context users bring while interacting with technology. By understanding these familial interfaces, we can establish more user-friendly interfaces. We can use signs and symbols that relate to users' social and cultural understanding. This helps provide a smoother learning experience and avoids unnecessary pressure on users.
2. Meaningful Interactions
Every element used on the digital interface has a meaning. By understanding our audience, we can craft meaningful interactions using various elements that provide information more clearly and consistently. A well-designed element gives the message briefly, whereas a wrong label used in crafting the interface may lead to confusion and cognitive burden.
3. Building Emotional Connections
Semiotics help build emotional connections with users. Specific colours, meaningful animation, and typography can invoke emotions and communicate values like reliability and fairness. By understanding the emotional impact of different signs and symbols, we can create interfaces that win users' trust.
4. Inclusivity
Inclusivity is crucial in user experience design. Digital media is open to all, so the interface should be sensitive to the emotions of diverse communities. Semiotics help remove biases and ensure inclusivity in our interface. Analysing international design conventions and understanding the cultural meanings of specific symbols can prevent misinterpretations and promote inclusive design practices.

12.6 EXAMPLES OF SEMIOTICS IN DIGITAL
Communication
COMMUNICATION
12.6.1 Emojis
In the meantime, these emojis have evolved; from a simple smiley face to various emojis, from anger to love, they can show different emotions. These emojis have become a global language, making expressions more interesting. Analysing these memes gives a variety of inputs related to their uses and meaning.
12.6.2 Button Icon
A simple like or unlike button carries social meaning. If a social media post gets more likes, it means that most users have approved of the message and agree with the idea shared in the online community.
12.6.3 Meme
Memes are condensed messages produced in a humorous way to touch the emotions of users. These memes have cultural and social contexts. Analysing the symbolism, visual jokes, and targeted audiences of memes provides an insightful understanding of current social and cultural trends, biases and ideas shared among and within online communities.
12.6.4 Logo
As a condensed visual representation of a brand, a logo is a perfect example of semiotics in action. The signifier is the physical form of the logo, in this case, the curved swoosh symbol. The signified is the complex web of concepts it represents, including movement, speed, victory, and achievement.
12.6.5 Hashtag
Hashtags like #BlackLivesMatter and #MeToo are mere keywords but represent a powerful symbol of social movements and collectivism. Analysing the semiotics of these hashtags, their evolution over time, and the emotional triggers they evoke reveals the potential of digital communication to mobilise public opinion and drive social change.
12.7 DESIGNING A SEMIOTICS STUDY
12.7.1 Identification of Problem
Before carrying out any study, one must identify the concerns or problems of the study area he or she intends to undertake. Only then will our research be relevant. To do that, we should aim to observe the patterns, phenomena, and events in our surroundings and media. Suppose we observe new patterns in media content, economy, habits, consumption, or technology. In that case, we can think of going ahead with that problem or concern to explore more about that issue or subject. In the semiotic study, we know the emphasis is on the 'text' and how it is 'read'. So, whatever concerns we will address through our study must relate to the 'message' of the selected medium, ranging from print to audio and audio-visual. 221

Analysis of Participation Let's take an example for illustration. Since the last decade, OTT (over-the-top) platforms have grown exponentially in India. At present, India is the world's fastest- growing OTT market. According to a recent report from the Economic Times, India's video OTT market is expected to reach 12.5 billion dollars by 2030 from about
1.5 billion dollars in 2021. Increasing viewership of web series worldwide suggests
that people are interested in watching web series. The question and curiosity arise regarding the distinguishing factor that makes these web series different from traditional mainstream media content. What content are they producing that is appealing to the audience? How have these web series been able to communicate stories so effectively? What are the meanings they can negotiate from web series? If these web series are becoming so popular, especially among all age groups, then to what extent can the way they convey a message and their mechanism of conveying a message be a potential game changer in strategic, effective communication? The above concerns and questions can best be answered by semiotic study. Now, we have identified the problem suitable for semiotic study, and we can explore the details and be specific to carry out the research. Likewise, we can explore the concerns and problems in other contemporary print, audio, and audio-visual mediums (newspaper, magazine, radio, television, digital media).
12.7.2 Rationale for selecting the topic
To reach the rationale for selecting the topic we want to undertake for study, we must conduct a thorough literature review of the selected study area. Also, we might encounter some situations where much research has already been conducted in certain areas, such as print, television, or digital media, such as social media or OTT platforms. However, those problems might not have been undertaken using semiotic study. We can think of undertaking such research from a semiotics angle. The research outcome might uncover new insights into the problem other research methods had previously dealt with. This could be the novelty of our research. The outcome of the thorough literature review will give only a solid rationale for selecting our research topic. Furthermore, after sorting out the topic we want to study, our literature review will guide us in framing the research questions and objectives of the study.
12.7.3 Research Methodology and Data Collection
The objectives of the intended study determine the suitable research methods to collect the data. In the methodology section, we must study and mention the philosophical dimension of our study area. These philosophical dimensions help us establish the justification for selecting specific data from the selected sample and make our study robust. We must filter and sort out the data from the selected samples to collect the data. Again, stressing this point, in a qualitative study, we must have enough justification for selecting the sample, selecting only a certain portion of the text or episodes for analysis to avoid bias and defend our study. While collecting the data from a digital medium, one should collect the data in a certain period. Since digital media, such as social media and OTT platforms, are dynamic, data changes quickly. For example, 222 a semiotic study was conducted on the comments of Twitter users on certain trending

issues on Twitter. Every other day, trends keep changing, and the issue's intensity Semiotics and Digital Communication and opinion change over time. To collect the correct data on any certain issue at a particular point in time, we must be attentive and never delay in collecting the data
12.7.4 Analysis
Now, we can select suitable semiotic methods, such as the commutation test, semiotic square, markedness, deconstruction, structural reduction, or multimodal analysis, depending on the medium and objective of our study.
12.7.5 Findings and Conclusion
After analysing the data, we should present our findings objective-wise. While presenting the findings, we should mention the significant findings we come across during the analysis. After analysing the findings of each objective collectively, we can mention the significant findings in totality. We can conclude by mentioning the outcome of the research and its significance and suggesting future courses of action in terms of contribution to scholarship in the study area and society at large.
12.8 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we learned semiotics and its application on digital platforms, popularly known as digital semiotics. We also learned about types of semiotics: multimodal semiotics and social semiotics. Now we know about the key concepts of semiotics: sign, codes, signifier, signified and significance. We also tried to understand various examples of digital semiotics. We also tried to understand how a semiotic study is carried out. Overall, semiotics equips us with a critical lens to analyse the complex world of digital communication. Understanding the meanings embedded within signs and symbols allows us to engage with online content more thoughtfully, creatively, and responsibly.
12.9 KEYWORDS
Myth : A myth is a culture's narrative to explain or comprehend a particular facet of nature or reality. Metonym : Making a part for the whole Connotation : Points to the sign's socio-cultural and 'personal' associations (ideological, emotional, etc.). Semiotics : Semiotics is the study of signs and symbols and their use or interpretation.
12.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Chandler, D. (2007). Semiotics. The basics/Daniel Chandler. NY: Taylor
Francis.
2. Hebert, L. (2019). An introduction to applied semiotics. Routledge.
3. Haykin, S., & Van Veen, B. (2007). Signals and systems. John Wiley &
Sons. 223

Analysis of Participation 4. Hawkes, T., & Hawkes, T. (1977). Structuralism & semiotics (pp. 16-17). London: Methuen.
5. Danesi, M., & Perron, P. (1999). Analysing cultures: An introduction and
handbook. Indiana University Press.
12.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Discourse analysis studies how different modes of communication, such as text,
image, and sound, work together to create meaning.
2. Social semiotics focuses on the social construction of meaning through signs
and symbols. On the other hand, Social semiology emphasises the system of signs within a society and how these systems evolved. Social semiotics is more interested in knowing how social structures, power dynamics, and ideologies influence how signs are used and interpreted. Social semiology focuses on the underlying codes and rules that govern sign production and interpretation within a specific cultural context. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Saussure's model of sign, which focused on linguistic signs (such as words),
defined a sign as composed of a signifier and a signified. The relationship between the signifier and the signified is called 'signification'. Signifier: The signifier is commonly interpreted as the physical form of a sign that can be perceived through our senses. The sign's image is perceived in different forms: a figure on the paper, sound in the air, traffic lights/signal colour. Signified: The signified is the mental image or concept to which it (sign's image) refers. This mental image or concept is common to all members of the same culture who share the same language. A signified should be identified as the 'notion' of a thing, not a thing. Signification: The relationship between the signifier and the signified is called 'signification'.
2. The key principles of semiotics are arbitrariness, intertextuality, contextuality,
dynamism, etc.
3. We ought to follow the given steps to design a semiotic study;
i. Identification of problem ii. The rationale for selecting the problem iii. Research methodology and iv. Analysis v. Findings and Conclusion

UNIT 13 ISSUES OF BIG DATA
Communication Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 What Is Big Data
13.3 5v's of Big Data
13.4 Types of Big Data.
13.5 Big Data and Media Industry
13.6 How Big Data Can Help the Business of Media Companies
13.7 Social Implications of Big Data
13.8 Recent Trends in Big Data Analytics
13.9 Challenges of Big Data
13.10 Big Data and Ethics
13.11 Let Us Sum Up
13.12 Keywords
13.13 Further Readings
13.14 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
13.0 INTRODUCTION
The Media and Entertainment industry is among the very first to adopt emerging technologies. The adoption of Virtual reality (VR), Mixed Reality (MR) and Augmented reality (AR) in creating new content is a recent example. Artificial Intelligence (AI) generated content in video and text form is also being used quickly, and advanced prototypes of generative AI-driven channels are being tested. AI- driven avatars and related technologies are being adopted in newsrooms in India, which promises better economic returns and low investment. The Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing, recommendation systems and metaverse are some examples to understand how the media & entertainment industry is being transformed. This new technology for content curation, creation, and dissemination is also transforming the entertainment sector, including gaming, over-the-top content, films, and content production for mobile apps. Media companies like Amazon, Google, Hulu, and Hotstar are not only providing services and products. Still, they are also changing how people consume content and interact with media through different digital devices and platforms. These processes create huge amounts of big data daily. Every media organisation wants to expand its customer base, optimise its revenue model, reduce investments, and increase profitability. Operational costs are one deterrent that stops new players from entering the media industry. With the emergence of digitisation and datafication, operational costs have been reduced substantially. At the same time, new players can focus on specific markets and target new customers. In the earlier days, content creation was expensive, and taking that content to audiences was an even bigger challenge. Again, there was no way of knowing the details about the engagement with the content.

Analysis of Participation A journalist prepares and publishes news reports on various events happening in and around the world. These news reports can be in text, audio, and video formats. Moreover, news reports can be in all formats or a combination of a few on social media and websites. This content, which is generated, disseminated to audiences, and commented upon by audiences, is seen as big data. Thus, it can be argued that in this digital era, almost every big media organisation relies on big data. With the help of big data and emerging technology, things have changed drastically. Media companies track their customers and generate daily reports of content consumed across regions, language preferences, genres, and the average time spent watching shows. This is big data. Like other sectors, the media industry also needs big data analytics to understand its customers better so that precise strategies can be formed to reach and engage them with the content. This makes the media & entertainment industry highly dependent on consumers.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Understand the concept of big data. Learn the uses of big data in the media and entertainment industry. Understand the factors which drive the growth of the media industry. Understand the ethics involved in big data.
13.2 WHAT IS BIG DATA
Information is expanding on a day-by-day basis all over the world. Billions of individuals go on the web and generate gigantic amounts of data. The amount of data collected by mobile apps and social media platforms daily is astonishing. To give an idea, Facebook generates almost 4 petabytes of data daily, 100 million gigabytes. This data is stored in a hive, which can store almost 300 petabytes. Similarly, WhatsApp users exchange up to 65 billion messages per day. Five million businesses use WhatsApp, with over 1 billion WhatsApp groups worldwide. According to 2020 statistics, Google handles 1.2 trillion searches yearly, roughly 40 thousand search queries per second. So, roughly, each person generates two MB of data per second. All our activities on the Internet create trails. Organisations, governments, universities, marketing companies, e-commerce sites, and other vendors know much about our likes, dislikes, habits, attitudes, preferences, etc. Data about our ethnicity, religion, political affiliation, interests, hobbies, health, income, and buying capacity is known or can be easily estimated through our history on apps and sites. User activities are monitored and captured by devices and the propriety apps. All this amounts to big data. In this era of big data gov, governments, organisations, universities, companies, and marketers derive information and meaning from data such as ethnicity, religion, legislation, sexuality, purchasing behaviour, medical records, salary, credit card usage, and travel history. Big data is increasing as the cost of Internet-enabled gadgets is 226 getting cheaper. Even the computational cost of handling and working on this big

data is getting more affordable. These innovations are giving rise to the 'datafication' Issues of Big Data of society, influencing all industries and human life significantly. Thus, big data refers to huge datasets that can be analysed and mined to get insights and value for the organisation. It is also seen as an umbrella term which includes techniques for dealing with massive data sets and the technologies that can be used to make sense of the data. So, big data means complex and expansive datasets that are getting bigger each day. The 5 Vs of big data that describe its characteristics: Volume: It refers to the vast datasets generated on social media platforms, social networks, media organisations, etc. Storage capacity for these massive datasets is expensive, making big data analytics costly. The high volume of data includes consumer profiles, their interactions with companies, usage history, purchase history, social media uploads, likes, dislikes, videos, insta-reels, etc. Variety: As customers interact with media service providers, various data is created in different formats, sizes, and types through different devices. Different devices and their apps are designed differently to allow different file types and affordances for users to comment, share, review, and react. Veracity: This refers to the issue of quality and reliability of big data. The data may not be complete, accurate and credible. Low veracity affects data analysis and inferences. For example, public sector data sets, Wikipedia, or crowdsource data might suffer from veracity. Velocity: Velocity refers to the speed at which big data is generated. It depends on the Internet, infrastructure, processing power of clients and servers, and bandwidth. Higher velocity ensures feedback and synchronous communication. For example, a sports website can update the scores faster than a TV news channel or other social media platforms. This can give the first movers an advantage and attract more traffic and business. However, higher velocity is relevant only when integrity is taken care of. Value: Value refers to the benefits of big data and looks at the output quality generated by big data analytics. Media companies should be able to pull value from their acquired big data and use it for growth and visibility. The tools required to derive value from big data sets must be carefully chosen. Apache Hadoop, SQL, and Microsoft Power BI are tools that find value from data sets.
13.4 TYPES OF BIG DATA
The captured data can be in different formats and come from different digital devices. Big data can be sourced from distinctive sources and comprise unstructured, semi- structured, or structured data. Unstructured data includes video, audio, email, surveys, social media, and more, making up 80% of all big data. Mining unstructured data to extract actionable business intelligence is a challenge for an analyst. Big data also includes information about user likes and dislikes, preferences, interests, and location. Let's extend this scenario where a company owns a TV channel, a radio station, a website, and a newspaper. It produces and promotes content for all ages and

Analysis of Participation genders in different regions, genres, and languages. Because of digitisation, this content can be shared, edited, commented upon, and reviewed on social media networks and messaging apps. Thus, this content may be republished, re-tweeted, and discussed extensively. All this user activity creates unstructured data, which can be mined to identify relationships, associations, patterns, and trends. The analysis and the insights gained from this unstructured data are invaluable for media companies as they help them plan their operations, marketing strategies, outreach activities, and, most importantly, the content and the format in which they need to be served. Structured data includes transactions, logs, and spreadsheets. On websites, the data provides click-through rates (CTR), engagement time on each page, number of external links used, time spent on each page, number of hyperlinks accessed, number of videos downloaded, images downloaded, pages saved, etc. Media organisations also look at social media sentiments, Google searches, social media searches, and cookies to extract information for their business operations. The data captured from portable devices like iPods, iPads, tablets, and mobile phones differs because the devices use different apps and operating systems. Moreover, mobile phones also offer data in the form of SMS and MMS. Data gathered from mobile phones may also include in-app sales, advertisements, video ads, banners, and other metrics. Different algorithms are used to analyse and make sense of the big data. These are used for prediction, classification, association, and clustering. Tools like Tableau and Power BI are used to visualise the insights. Big data can be classified based on several different criteria, such as the source, the structure, the application, and the analytics approach. Here are some common classifications of big data: Structured, semi-structured, and unstructured: This classification is based on the structure of the data. Structured data is well-organised and easy to process, like data in a database. Semi-structured data, such as XML or JSON, has a defined structure but may also contain unstructured data. Unstructured data, such as social media posts or images, does not have a specific structure and is difficult to process. Internal and external: This classification is based on the source of the data. Internal data is generated within an organisation, such as sales data or customer data. External data comes from sources outside the organisation, such as social media data, weather data, or financial data. Batch and real-time: This classification is based on the velocity of the data. Batch data processing involves analysing data in large batches, often overnight or at set intervals. Real-time data processing involves analysing data as it is generated, like processing stock market data in real-time. Descriptive, diagnostic, predictive, and prescriptive: This classification is based on the analytics approach. Descriptive analytics involves summarising historical data to understand what has happened. Diagnostic analytics involves identifying the causes of a particular event or pattern. Predictive analytics involves forecasting future events or patterns based on historical data. Prescriptive analytics involves recommending actions based on insights 228 from predictive analytics.

By understanding the different classifications of big data, businesses and organisations Issues of Big Data can better plan and implement their big data strategies to extract insights and drive value from their data. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is big data? Explain structured and unstructured data.

2. Discuss the 5 Vs of big data.

3. Discuss the relevance of big data in the media & entertainment industry.

13.5 BIG DATA AND MEDIA INDUSTRY
Subscription-based streaming services like Netflix, Amazon, and Hotstar provide platforms and infrastructure for producers to get their content screened. These companies also invest their money in producing movies and TV shows. The media landscape is changing fast where audiences, producers, developers, aggregators, and intermediaries exist and generate big data. Apart from the generation of content, these service providers use big data to know their viewer preferences, likes, dislikes, consumption patterns, consumption history, devices they use, preferred day and time to watch content and the amount of money they are willing to spend for that content. Big data also predicts the likelihood of a movie being bought or rented out through their platform. The time of release, storyline, advertisers, and products to be advertised is also decided with the help of big data. Finally, the market trends and the acceptability of themes in foreign countries are considered before releasing the programs on different continents. Big data is also used in data journalism. User-generated content is a valuable source of information for media organisations. The debates around major news stories, viewers' reactions on social media sites, and messaging apps like WhatsApp become important fuel for these outlets. This also helps the news organisation automate a few processes in its work chain, simplifying its work, making it more efficient, and preparing it for bigger challenges. 229

News organisations are keen to capture content consumption patterns to extract
Analysis of
Participation useful information to improve their circulation, TV and radio ratings, audience views, and viewer perceptions. Big data creates many opportunities for journalists and reporters to build robust relationships with their audience and readers. Huff's post uses large datasets and insights drawn from them to enhance the user's experience. They use big data to improve the user experience by offering real-time dashboards, recommendations, and personalisation. They also use small data for audience research, content research and search engine optimisation for faster retrieval and higher ranks on search engines. Tom Betts, head of client analytics at the Financial Times, stated that they use identifiers like customer signatures to monitor digital spending and use that history to understand consumers' preferences for content. This helps them personalise and prepares them to provide relevant content to consumers. So, they use intelligence and develop new offers to increase the consumer base and give value to the existing consumers. Peter Bale, CNN's worldwide vice president and head of digital operations, pointed out how large databases deliver news, how CNN listens to and caters to its increasing market, and how CNN also uses big data to find relevant data-driven stories for its readers and viewers. The use of big data in the media is continuously expanding. It checks fake news and generates text through LLMs, recommender systems, metaverse, and generative AI tools. All this is done to expand the markets, offer new products to new customers, and ensure that the existing customers do not disappear. Big data also helps to enter new markets where very few players exist. For example, in industries like publishing and fashion
13.6 HOW CAN BIG DATA HELP THE BUSINESS
OF MEDIA COMPANIES?
Some of how big data can help media companies grow are:
1. Client Loyalty:
Media companies like Viacom 18 use big data to ensure audience retention during ad breaks by choosing the time for the breaks in news programs. This helps Viacom keep viewers glued to the TV sets even during ad breaks, which has resulted in financial gains for the company.
2. Investment in new shows and mixed genres:
Big data includes various formats, such as numeric, date, images, text, geotags, geospatial, audio, video, and graphics. All this data helps content producers and management teams understand audiences' needs and psychology, which helps them develop new media products and services. Media companies like Netflix, Prime, and Hotstar ensure that they invest in the production of shows and movies that their audiences will like. This exercise ensures higher returns.
3. Audience segmentation and customer profiles:
Media companies like X, Spotify, Apple, Instagram, Hulu, and Amazon 230 use big data to classify audiences and use this classification to target

advertisements. Specific audience populations are catered in a manner Issues of Big Data to suit their requirements. YouTube uses big data and machine learning techniques to improve the relevancy of customer advertisements. This promises a higher return on Investment (ROI). Big data in media organisations maintains customer profiles and supplier data, which is dynamic and updated regularly. Media companies always want to have updated information about customers. This helps them track customers' changing preferences and build more engaged relationships. Quite a few of these customers also happen to be suppliers and producers of new data. For example, many who create data for YouTube and Instagram are also Netflix and Amazon Prime audiences.
13.7 SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF BIG DATA
Big data have many implications for society. A few of them have been discussed.
1) Enhanced decision-making
Big data significantly affects supply and management processes, such as distributed process planning. It is also used for customer insight-driven marketing, advertising, and business-to-business processes. Advertising agencies push their advertisements to specific users since they know their preferences, buying capacity, brand preference, and the frequency with which they purchase new products and services. All this suggests that big data is used for faster decision-making in media companies.
2) Forecast market trends in the industry
Big data is also used for surveillance, monitoring, and financial purposes. Financial models utilise huge amounts of information from Internet companies and e-businesses to forecast the growth of different sectors. Data generated from C2C, B2C and B2B indicates the future of small and big media companies. Many of these companies are listed on stock markets, and their big data includes information about their IPOs, stocks and shares, NAV, and other financial indicators, which are helpful for investors in making decisions about their investments. Big data is also helpful in customising payrolls, transactions, sales, negotiating future contracts and finalising International business deals.
3) Adaption of new technologies
Emerging technologies like IoT, text mining, blockchain, generative AI, and transformers are being adopted in various sectors, such as manufacturing, automobiles, and consumer appliances, with the help of big data. Log files, data from sensors and devices, radio-frequency identification data, GPS coordinates, clickstreams, and social sentiments help these technologies provide solutions for the industry to grow and contribute to the economy.

Analysis of Participation 13.8 RECENT TRENDS IN BIG DATA ANALYTICS Big data analytics is an evolving field, and there are several recent trends that are shaping the future of this domain. Here are some of the key trends in big data analytics:
1. Real-time Analytics: Real-time data processing and analysis are becoming
increasingly important as businesses seek to make more informed decisions based on up-to-date information.
2. Edge Computing: Edge computing involves processing data closer to the
source, rather than sending it to a centralised server or cloud. This trend is gaining traction in industries such as healthcare and manufacturing, where real-time insights are critical.
3. Cloud-based Analytics: Cloud-based analytics platforms are becoming
increasingly popular, as they offer flexibility, scalability, and cost effectiveness. Cloud platforms such as AWS, Azure, and Google Cloud Platform offer a range of big data tools and services.
4. Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning: Machine learning and
AI are becoming increasingly important in big data analytics, as they can help automate data processing and analysis and provide more accurate insights.
5. Data Privacy and Security: With the increasing amount of data being
collected and analysed, data privacy and security are becoming major concerns. Businesses must ensure that they are compliant with data protection regulations and that they are taking steps to protect sensitive data.
6. Data Democratisation: Data democratisation involves making data
accessible to all stakeholders in an organisation, enabling them to make data-driven decisions. This trend is gaining traction as businesses seek to break down data silos and improve collaboration and communication across teams.
7. Natural Language Processing (NLP): NLP is a field of AI that involves
analysing and interpreting human language. NLP is becoming increasingly important in big data analytics, as it can help businesses extract insights from unstructured data sources such as social media and customer feedback. These trends are shaping the future of big data analytics and will continue to influence the development of new tools and technologies in this field.
13.9 CHALLENGES OF BIG DATA
1) Big Data Divide
The Big Data divide can be seen in two ways. It refers to users' difficulty accessing, using, and understanding the technologies and the agency they offer. This divide might have consequences for users of all ages and genders. For instance, senior citizens and rural women might struggle to use online banking and health services banks and government hospitals offer.

On the other hand, the 'Big Data divide' also refers to the relationship Issues of Big Data between media companies that collect, store, and mine big data and the consumers whose data is collected. This phenomenon increases the divide and makes consumers less powerful as they cannot access data, technology, know-how, or capital. This divide undoubtedly positions media companies in a more advantageous position.
2) Social cooling and withdrawal
Social cooling happens because of the perceptions that emerge from big data. People feel that big data may reflect their weaknesses and analyse other personality traits, which are converted into scores. These scores may affect their 'digital reputation', limiting their growth opportunities. Social cooling deters people from speaking freely, and they gradually start exercising restraint over their thoughts and speech. Eventually, self-censorship prevails, and people stop raising their voices.
3) Complexity in Computation
Big data computation presents a bigger challenge than getting and storing data. The computation challenge increases with the irregularity, inadequacy, ambiguity, speed of exchange, scalability, and versatility of datasets. The real problem in digital media datasets is making sense of such a huge volume of data. Here, data mining comes to the rescue of media companies. Data mining helps the analyst dig through huge amounts of big data and indicate beneficial results for the media organisation. Organisations must be straightforward about their requirements with big data and understand the basic decisions of algorithms, including prioritisation, classification, aggregation, and filtering. These algorithms find hidden patterns, correlations, dependencies, and trends over some time. Error handling is also an issue with big data. Moreover, with the coming of AI, it is quite difficult to find data credibility. Is the data organic, or has artificiality been created through AI?
13.10 BIG DATA AND ETHICS
1) Privacy Concerns:
Users are increasingly concerned about how health companies, the insurance sector, investment companies, telecom companies, and e-commerce companies use their data. Individuals may not be aware of organisations' policies and may feel cheated, as their privacy might be compromised. Re-identification is another concern that can happen to any individual if his details are in the big data. User details get anonymised in such huge datasets. Re-identification happens because of the advancement in technology and computing power. Deep learning and AI tools can enable a trace back to the original personal data. Links between big data and users' web usage, search history, and personal data can be analysed for confirmation. This puts the users at a greater risk of privacy invasion, scams, and fraud.

Analysis of Participation 2) Data Protection: Ensuring the protection of data is essential in big data applications. Safeguards must ensure unauthorised access, data breaches, and big data hacking do not happen. Media giants like Facebook, WhatsApp, and Amazon have access to the personal data of millions of users. Proper data protection laws should be enforced so people feel secure and can freely collaborate through the cloud. Moreover, data theft and impersonation in shared networks can lead to infringement and bigger crimes, which may affect users psychologically, emotionally, and financially.
3) Bias and Fairness:
Big data and the algorithms on which it is trained can be biased. This can lead to incorrect results and the formation of biased policies and decisions. Certain groups, leaders, and communities might be misrepresented, leading to disharmony.
4) Transparency and Accountability:
There is often a lack of transparency in how big data algorithms make decisions. Organisations must be transparent about their data practices and algorithms to rectify this. They should also have mechanisms to solve disputes when cases arise. Efforts must be made to inform individuals about how their data is being used and to give them some degree of control over its usage.
5) Data Ownership and Control:
Questions about data ownership and control are often discussed in big data. Data ownership is the owner's intellectual property right. This is a relevant concern among users since big data companies are often accused of copyright violations while generating and storing data. Thus, individuals should have the right to access and control their data, and organisations should be transparent about how they collect, use, and share data. While extracting and using big data, the algorithms may not know about data ownership. With the help of generative AI, the original data set and other digital assets can be easily converted into a new product that differs from the original. This severely impacts the economic growth of the original contributors. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is the big data divide? Elaborate.

234

2. How are big data and AI changing the news industry in India? Discuss. Issues of Big Data

3. Discuss the ethical issues related to big data.

13.11 LET US SUM UP
Big data has become the most fundamental requirement of media organisations to accomplish their goals and profits. Present-day technology and innovations are changing the practice of journalism and making newsrooms more dependent on AI and big data. Big data is relevant for the news as well as for the entertainment industry. User-generated content on websites, mobile apps, e-commerce sites, surveillance, cameras, and sensors are captured and stored as unstructured and structured datasets. Deep learning algorithms make sense of these huge datasets and provide insight to the media owners and stakeholders. This data mining process has issues, such as privacy, copyright, data protection, and the digital divide. Overall, big data promises a revolution in generating and disseminating media content. This revolution will expose consumers to new media products and services that may get cheaper with time and promise them an engaging content consumption experience.
13.12 KEYWORD
Algorithm : An algorithm is a set of instructions, usually coded in a programming language, to carry out certain tasks on a computer. Artificial Intelligence : Artificial Intelligence is a branch of computer science that allows machines to simulate human intelligence and be programmed to work like humans. The machines can be trained to do problem solving and reasoning, just like humans. Cloud Computing is the delivery of computing services over the Internet. The services may include accessing software, storing results, and analysing them with the help of the Internet. This technology saves the resources of the local machine. Data Mining : The process of extracting patterns, relationships, and other valuable information from big data sets. Data mining uses machine learning and deep learning techniques. 235

Analysis of Participation Internet of Things (IoT): The network of physical devices interconnected over the Internet. These devices collect and exchange information among themselves with the help of sensors and software. Devices over IOT follow certain protocols for the exchange of information. Linear Regression : Linear Regression is a statistical model that estimates the linear relationship between continuous variables. Linear regression uses data points to check the linearity between dependent and independent variables.
13.13 FURTHER READING
1. Dasgupta, N. (2018). Practical Big Data Analytics: Hands-on Techniques to
Implement Enterprise Analytics and Machine Learning Using Hadoop, Spark,
NoSQL, and R. United Kingdom: Packt Publishing.
2. Minelli, M., Chambers, M., Dhiraj, A. (2013). Big Data, Big Analytics: Emerging
Business Intelligence and Analytic Trends for Today's Businesses. United
Kingdom: Wiley.
3. Prasad, Y. L. (2016). Big Data Analytics Made Easy. India: Notion Press.
13.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1:
1. Big data is a term used to describe the vast volumes of structured and unstructured
data generated by digital processes and interactions. Structured data refers to information that is organised and easily searchable, often stored in databases or spreadsheets, while unstructured data lacks a predefined data model and includes text, images, videos, social media posts, and more. The distinction between structured and unstructured data is essential because different tools and techniques are required to analyse and extract insights from each type.
2. The concept of big data is often characterised by five key dimensions, known
as the 5 Vs: volume, velocity, variety, veracity, and value. Volume refers to the sheer quantity of data, often measured in terabytes, petabytes, or even exabytes. Velocity relates to the speed at which data is generated, collected, and processed in real-time. Variety encompasses the diverse types and sources of data, including structured and unstructured data formats such as text, images, videos, sensor data, and social media content. Veracity pertains to the accuracy, reliability, and trustworthiness of the data, ensuring that organisations can confidently use it for decision-making and analysis. Finally, value emphasises the importance of extracting meaningful insights and deriving actionable intelligence from big data to drive business outcomes, improve operations, enhance customer experiences, and create value.
3. In the media and entertainment industry, big data plays a transformative role
by providing valuable insights into consumer behaviour, content preferences, and market trends. Media companies and entertainment providers leverage big

data analytics to gain a deeper understanding of their audience, tailor content Issues of Big Data offerings to individual preferences, optimise advertising strategies, and enhance overall user experiences. By analysing vast amounts of data from various sources such as social media interactions, streaming platforms, website traffic, and consumer feedback, organisations can identify emerging trends, predict audience demand, and develop targeted content recommendations. Furthermore, big data enables media companies to measure the effectiveness of their content distribution channels, track audience engagement metrics, and refine their marketing efforts in real-time. Overall, big data empowers the media and entertainment industry to make data-driven decisions, optimise content creation and distribution strategies, and ultimately deliver more personalised and engaging experiences to their audience. Check Your Progress 2:
1. The big data divide refers to the unequal access to and utilisation of large volumes
of data, creating disparities among individuals, organisations, and nations. This disparity arises due to variations in technological infrastructure, resources, and expertise. Those with access to sophisticated data analytics tools and resources can harness big data for various purposes, such as business insights, healthcare advancements, and social development. However, marginalised communities, regions with limited Internet connectivity, and economically disadvantaged groups often lack the necessary resources to leverage big data effectively. Consequently, the big data divide exacerbates existing inequalities, hindering socio-economic progress, and perpetuating digital disparities. Bridging this gap requires concerted efforts to democratise access to data infrastructure, enhance digital literacy, and ensure equitable distribution of benefits derived from big data analytics.
2. In India, the convergence of big data and AI is reshaping the news industry by
revolutionising content creation, distribution, and audience engagement. Data- driven insights enable journalists and media organisations to identify emerging trends, analyse audience preferences, and tailor content for targeted demographics. AI-powered algorithms optimise news delivery, personalised recommendations, and user interactions across digital platforms. Furthermore, data analytics facilitate real-time fact-checking, enhancing journalistic integrity and credibility. However, concerns regarding data privacy, algorithmic bias, and misinformation loom large. Media practitioners must navigate ethical dilemmas associated with data-driven journalism, ensuring transparency, accountability, and responsible use of big data and AI technologies to uphold journalistic standards and safeguard public trust in the news media.
3. Ethical considerations surrounding big data encompass privacy infringement,
consent issues, algorithmic bias, and societal implications. The collection, storage, and analysis of vast amounts of personal data raise concerns regarding individual privacy rights and data protection. Moreover, the opaque nature of data algorithms can perpetuate biases, reinforce stereotypes, and exacerbate discrimination against marginalised communities. Additionally, the commodification of personal data by corporations for profit-driven purposes raises questions about informed consent and user autonomy. Furthermore, the potential misuse of big data for surveillance, manipulation, and social control poses significant ethical challenges. Addressing these issues requires robust regulatory frameworks, ethical guidelines, and stakeholder collaboration to balance innovation with ethical principles, ensuring the responsible and equitable use of big data for the benefit of society.

Introduction : Anyalysis of
UNIT 14 POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ICTS
Participation Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Introduction to political economy, definitions, and characteristics
14.3 Origins of political economy
14.4 Schools of political economy
14.5 Media Ownership, Concentration, and Control
14.6 Political Economy of Media in Information Age
14.7 Key Components of Political Economy of Media
14.8 Political Economy of Media in Indian Context
14.9 Evolution of ICT
14.10 Political Economy of Personal Information
14.10.1 Political Economy of Information and Communication Technology
14.11 Opportunities and Challenges of PEICT
14.12 Let Us Sum Up
14.13 Keywords
14.14 Further Readings
14.15 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
This Unit is concerned with acquainting the learners with the basic concept of political economy, its history and evolution, and its connection with communication. The learner shall develop a critical analysis of the different schools of political economy and understand the different aspects of media ownership and power dynamics that are in practice. Again, understanding the relationship between the evolution of Political Economy and that of Personal Information will eventually help readers connect the broad concept of political economy with that of communication technology. Eventually, the learner will be able to understand and analyse the Opportunities and Challenges of PEICT.
14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: Identify the concepts and evolution of Political economy; Discuss the broad concepts of media ownership and the dissemination of power; Describe the different schools of political economy;

Discuss the factors and challenges of communication technology; and Political Economy of ICTS Develop the areas of political economy with that of Information and Communication Technology.
14.2 INTRODUCTION TO POLITICAL ECONOMY,
DEFINITIONS AND CHARACTERISTICS
A crucial wing of social science today is the political economy. The approach conceptualised in the early 1940s encompasses the study of the social relations, associations, and power relations that eventually constitute the production, distribution, and consumption of resources, including communication resources. The political economy of communication has traditionally been addressed as spatialization, which refers to social activities, material things, and experiences or progression that consider geography, sociology, urban planning, and cultural studies and create a sense of space. The global economy and politics were shaped in the early 1970s and 1980s. This was primarily because relocating industrial output from expensive developed nations to developing nations or nations with limited resources became feasible. All this can be attributed to the use of modern communication technology. There were shifts in the political and economic landscape, which had a massive impact on the communication system and how the media was designed. Numerous Asian and Latin American nations, including Argentina, Venezuela, Chile, Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, India, and China, took to developing consumer economies, triggering extensive communication. Greater demand for media products followed economic expansion. This opened doors for foreign direct investment, global joint ventures, and content exports, creating a steady demand for tangible products like goods and intangible products like information and services. Similarly, the Berlin Wall's fall and the Eastern Bloc's collapse in 1989 created fresh investment opportunities for Western media worldwide. The loss of colonial power and the emergence of young economies looking for information balance also largely also developed the political economy.
14.3 ORIGINS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
The term political economy started as early as the 1940s and bought out the elusive use of power, the way the resources are owned, produced, circulated, and eventually consumed. Political economy has led to the expansion of political activism. This includes the continued growth of established organisations such as the Union for Democratic
Communications and the International Association for Media and Communication
Research. The media reform movement most substantially embodies the trend in the United States. Still, it is also exemplified in the success of new national (Free Press) and international (the World Summit on the Information Society) movements. Political economy has gradually transitioned from its conventional strength in probing how power functions systematically in older media to various approaches to new media, especially the Internet. This creates a different degree of power play in different sectors. The elevated new media sector has also shifted the power from the content creators to the consumers and passive content creators.

Analysis of Participation 14.4 SCHOOLS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
There are different schools of political economy. Prominent among them are: The Radical Critique: Utopian and Marxian socialists formed a powerful critique of the classical position, from the human devastation brought about by policies enacted in its name to the theoretical shortcomings. Their radical response was supported and sustained by workers and other social movements that enlarged intellectual critique by incorporating the democratic forces erupting in response to the Industrial Revolution. This forms the base of Radical Critique in Political Economy.
The Conservative Critique
Often known as constitutional political economy, the conservative school of public choice works on applying economics to moral decision-making and extends its analytical tools to reason out moral considerations. This is one of the primary reasons why political economists of communication continue to hold a firm stance regarding the significance of moral philosophy despite resistance from structuralism and deconstructionism circles. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Write about Political Economy.

2. Discuss the Radical critique of the Political economy.

14.5 MEDIA OWNERSHIP, CONCENTRATION, AND
CONTROL
In a capitalist society and more so in any demography, how a social structure is created through production and consumption determines the economy. Political involvement here refers to the existence of power. When the product is none other than the communication tools, right from the production, distribution, and consumption of resources, including communication resources, we arrive at what we call the political economy of communication.

Media ownership: Political Economy of ICTS
Today's media is hardly independent; it is a full-fledged set-up that different media conglomerates own. Based on the types of ownership patterns and the emphasis on power, there are different types of media ownership. They are: a. Chain ownership: Chain ownership implies the kind of ownership when a single chain of media conglomerates owns numerous outlets in a single medium. For instance, Radio Mirchi has outlets across India, and News 18 owns media outlets across different regions. b. Cross-Ownership: Cross-Ownership implies a kind of ownership in which the same corporation or conglomerate owns several media platforms, such as newspapers, e-magazines, web portals, television channels, radio, etc. For example, the Times group under Bennet and Coleman owns the Times Now News Channel, Times of India newspaper, and Radio Channels. c. Conglomerate ownership: Conglomerate ownership implies the ownership of several business enterprises, among which media is one. d. Vertical Integration: Vertical integration indicates that a media company can often control the production of the resources used to create content. For example, a newspaper publisher may own the Internet domains if the business concern is releasing a particular web portal. Similar is the ownership of cable networks by news channel owners or taking over the timber industry when the media house generates newspapers. The different kinds of media ownership determine a definite shift of power from one place to another, and the owners have a different power equation, especially when delivering and communicating using any medium. Control: Media Ownership brings out the element of changing power dynamics. The evolution of new communication technology has changed the flow of communication. With the growth of globalisation and privatisation, new communication technology has a strong role in working for or against those in power. Political Economy of Communication: Political economists generally refer to this problem of media concentration as the determining factor of opinion, which is crucial in democracy. With the meteoric increase in the size of the media, there has been a shift in its assets, revenues, profit, staff, and stock value, which determines the political economy of communication. Political economy has many sides to it. It has made important strides in addressing the combined junctions of feminist studies and communication aspects and deepening into moral philosophy. Some of the primary characteristics of the Political Economy of Communication are: Exercising control over the thought process: Even in the face of resistance, political economy clears our path for thinking about a certain set of social interactions that are concentrated on power or the capacity to apply control to manipulate the thought process through a systematic control over other individuals, groups, and objects.

Analysis of Participation Social praxis: The political economy works on social praxis, which determines the fundamental unity of thinking and doing. This function functions on the core principles of being conceptually strong and emphasising the steady change process. Moral philosophy: Political economy is also invaluable for its inclination towards moral philosophy, which strategically works on the values that create social behaviour and depend on the moral principles that ought to guide efforts to change it. Political economy has paid some attention to audiences, particularly to understand the common practice whereby advertisers pay for an audience's size and quality (propensity to consume) that a newspaper, magazine, website, radio, or television program can deliver.
14.6 POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE MEDIA IN
INFORMATION AGE
Primarily, political economy, as it applies to the media, has historically found itself divided into two distinct approaches of study: The socialist democratic tradition of Europe that saw broadcasting dominated by State-funded public service broadcasters such as the British Broadcasting Corporation following the Marxist approach, and the contrasting completely commercial American media that drove studies in political economy of the media towards the economics of media ownership. In recent years, however, globally, the role of public service media has gradually lessened; commercial media provides much of the content. Therefore, in today's era of globalisation, much scholarship regarding the media's political economy has focused on the commodification of information and media artefacts, which are produced and distributed for profit by commercial organisations in a capitalistic setup. Wasko reiterates that communication and information, as crucial components of the marketisation process, have also developed as significant industries; "in many countries, public media institutions have been privatised, along with other public institutions, opening additional markets for growing transnational media and entertainment conglomerates" (2005). While Internet and new media distribute culture to a far wider global audience today - a phenomenon not witnessed earlier in the history of mass media - media conglomerates and institutions such as the State continue to act as hegemonic forces in the production and distribution of culture (Kellner, 2015; McChesney, 2013). This is, however, not to suggest that the power of audiences themselves as producers of media content may be overlooked entirely; "in the age of new media and social networking. it is also possible for consumers to become producers of their own media content and form, including oppositional voices and resistances" (Kellner, 2015).
14.7 KEY COMPONENTS OF THE POLITICAL
ECONOMY OF THE MEDIA: THE BUSINESS
OF MEDIA
An analysis of the media business, both traditional and convergent, encompasses some prominent concepts. It is incumbent to mention that traditional media comprises newspapers, magazines, television, radio, music, film, and video that do not use digital platforms. Convergence, however, does not lend itself to an explanation with

much ease. While broadly, convergence is considered the "ongoing restructuring Political Economy of ICTS of media companies as well as to describe the latest developments in media forms, distribution, and consumption", there is no universally accepted definition of the concept (Appelgren, 2004). By convergence, Jenkins (2006) denotes the flow of media content across diverse platforms, the nexus between different media industries, and the exercise of choice by audiences in accessing any media that caters to their immediate needs. He further elucidates that media convergence is not merely a technological process that brings "multiple media functions within the same devices"; convergence represents a cultural shift with consumers motivated to explore new information "and make connections among dispersed media content". Nevertheless, the political economy of the media, as stated at the start of this paragraph, encompasses certain key concepts, which will be touched upon here to direct the reader towards a holistic analysis of the subject.
14.7.1 Commodification/Commercialisation of Media Resources
Content and products created by the mass media are typically assigned a monetary and economic value in the process termed commodification. The modes of commercialisation or commodification vary according to technology and the institutional frameworks within which the symbolic media forms are deployed (Thompson: 1995). These products and services are then sold to consumers and buyers for profit. Examples of commodification include producing multiple copies of printed media artefacts such as books, advertising of sale spaces in newspapers and magazines, selling radio and television airtime to advertisers, providing broadcast and Internet services for licence and subscription fees, etc.
14.7.2 Diversification of/Synergy among media conglomerates
Diversification, explains Booz, Allen, and Hamilton (1985), is a way to expand a business to ensure higher growth and minimise risk. Companies may diversify their operations by investing in new products or services in other geographic markets or tapping into new consumer segments. It is important to note here that aside from media corporatisation and ownership concentration - take, for instance, six multimedia corporations (Time et al. owned by General Electric, Bertelsmann, CBS, Disney and Viacom) and 4 Internet giants with diversified media holdings produce the most content in the world - globalisation, digitisation, Internet and cultural differentiation of media "have induced new forms of organisation, production, and distribution through which these multi-national media businesses operate" (Arsenault & Castells, 2008). Globalisation, which encompasses transitions in the nature and location of the key components of the political economy - production, consumption and distribution - of products, services, information, and wealth from domestic and local systems to highly integrated global systems (Wilson et al., 2013), along with diversification, are together "solidifying the formation of a global network of interlocked media businesses, the backbone of which is formed by a select number of multi-national media conglomerates'' (Arsenault & Castells, 2008). Further, various businesses owned by these media conglomerates have the scope to synergise to minimise risks and maximise profits (Wasko, 2005).
14.7.3 Horizontal/ Vertical Integration of Media Enterprises
Deregulation and digitisation have enabled companies to add related media businesses in vertical integration. Vertical integration has advantages such as lower transaction

Analysis of Participation costs (the buying and selling costs incurred when separate companies own two stages of production and operational costs), the supply assurance of critical materials, improved coordination of production and inventory scheduling between stages, greater scope for innovation given possible participation in relevant production and distribution activities which are rife with possibilities of change thus further facilitating adequate coordination of marketing and technical functions and improved coordination, and finally higher entry barriers because more financial and managerial resources are required to enter a vertically integrated company or compete with it (Buzzell, 1983). Horizontal integration occurs when enterprises add more companies that operate in similar lines of business to their portfolio (Wasko, 2005).
14.7.4 Concentration
Media concentration is defined "as an increase in the presence of one or a few media companies in any market" caused by mergers and acquisitions and the absence of competition (Meier & Trappel, 1998, p. 41). Concentrated ownership of mass media or the domination of global markets by a few companies (transnational media conglomerates or TMNC) is fundamentally facilitated by deregulation (policy allowing foreign entities to enter the domestic market) and the advent of new technologies that have made diversification possible. The implications of media concentration by way of risks to media diversity, loss of editorial freedom, and homogenisation of cultural content are primarily significant in media markets where the plurality of news, information, and entertainment has profound and largely positive roles in democratisation and informed citizenship, and the facilitation of cultural growth. This is not to suggest that caps on foreign ownership do better in ensuring media diversity, given that such regulated ownership further reinforces concentration at a national level (McQuail & Siune, 1998). Nevertheless, Bagdikian (1990: 5) writes: Market dominant corporations in the mass media influence the public's news, information, public ideas, popular culture, and political attitudes. The same corporations exert considerable influence within government precisely because they influence the audiences' perceptions of public life, including perceptions of politics as they appear-- or do not appear--in the media. All these key concepts about the political economy of the media have implications that are beyond the purview of this chapter. It is, however, in the interest of an engaged student to explore alternative views and criticisms of these phenomena as put forth by media scholars who approach the political economy of the media primarily with the two contrasting perspectives: media as an instrument of public welfare and media as an economic entity.
14.8 POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE MEDIA: THE
INDIAN CONTEXT
Given the theoretical underpinnings of the political economy of the media discussed till now, it becomes incumbent on the author to briefly discuss the political economy as it applies to media in India. India's economic crisis as an aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War and its following bailout from the International Monetary Fund, given its declining investor confidence in the global fiscal markets, pushed for a large-scale structural reform programme in India. Changes in the global political economy - with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of Communism as chief influencing factors - further influenced India towards economic liberalisation, with the country realising the urgency and importance of "a modern and efficient telecommunications system as vital to the to the success of the overall reform program (sic)" (Sinha, 244 74). This led to the opening of the telecommunications sector to private capital

and multi-national corporations and the loosening of the government's monopolistic Political Economy of ICTS tight hold on the sector. Thomas (2010: 70) explains that many changes in the Indian media landscape brought about by this deregulation, economic liberalisation, globalisation, and privatisation make documenting the political economy of media or communications in India today challenging. The changing nature of politics in India that has inexplicably pushed media to take sides, multiple sources of funding of media organisations, the gradual lessening influence and power of India's public service broadcaster Prasar Bharati (that operates Doordarshan and All India Radio), and unclear policy directives regarding vertical and horizontal integration, consolidation and cross-media ownership of media entities have further created an unclear mediascape in the country.
14.9 EVOLUTION OF ICT
The final ten years of the 20th century were both the greatest and the worst In terms of public service education since the history of devices created a ground whereby it began to keep track of objects and generate data. Starting from the first electrical digital computer in history, the Atanasoff-Berry Computer (ABC), which debuted in 1942, the advent of computing and IT in the US set off the era of Information Technology. Post-World War II, computers replaced traditional bookkeeping and accounting methods, even with the ABC being reintroduced and the Electronic Numerical Integrator Analyzer and Computer (ENIAC) being deployed to assist with firing table preparation. Not long after, vacuum tubes were replaced by transistors in the 1950s; with microchips, floppy disks, and now drives, information sharing has become an extended part of human life. Today, from brick-and-mortar governance, even day-to-day life has been transformed into a click-and-chip mechanism. Application-based technology and the subsequent evolution of new business models and applications exist almost everywhere. Information and Communication technology today has undergone a sea change with the presence of traditional computer-based technologies and the more updated digital communication that thrives on constant connectivity. ICT and the Digital divide: The digital divide refers to the gap between those with regular, effective access to digital and information technology and those without access to it. There is physical access to technology, hardware, and, more broadly, skills and resources that allow for its use. The imbalance of such technological ownership is termed the digital divide. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Write about the different types of media ownership. Does it have any implications
for power?

245

Analysis of Participation 2. Discuss the history and evolution of Information and Communication Technology.

14.10 POLITICAL ECONOMY OF PERSONAL
INFORMATION
In the present generation, information is the new currency. One must understand that measuring personal information in units like goods is impossible to determine the exact value of personal information. Information carriers like books, records, films, and news packages can be marketed in units and can be individually priced. Sometimes, it is also the medium through which it is circulated, determining its price. There is no homogeneity in its measure. Copyright and other types of "intellectual property" law, which attempt to heavily impose criminal liability on those who might attempt to "evade" technical safeguards against unlawful copying, are examples of intangible objects that Marx finds difficult to determine the units of measurement for. This is an attempt to utilise or manage the political economy component of private data.
14.7.1 Political Economy of Information and Communication
Technology ICT is now a noteworthy constituent of the economy. Computers and Internet access are indispensable to all businesses and consumers for commercial objectives, such as increasing product quality, offering customers more customised and diverse options, and making sales of goods and services. There has been a meteoric rise in the last two decades in the invasion of technology. Its effects on economic growth in both developed and developing nations manifest the way domination through technology. Despite the recent global economic crisis, there has been an upward trend; yet country-level data on computer, mobile phone, and ICT diffusion rates vary across different countries and areas. This also determines the power play and subsequent ownership of these ICT tools that are influential in the socio-economic era and the political front. In a gist, this is the broad concept of the political economy of ICT. Check your progress - 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you mean by the political economy of ICT? Discuss with examples.

2. What are the different challenges of Political Economy in ICT? Political Economy of ICTS

14.11 OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
The different opportunities of Political Economy under the Information and Communication Technology are: a. With ICT impacting the power structure and international politics, there are opportunities to speed up and intensify the international flow of money and goods. b. ICT has led to easy communication of policies and has standardised policy implementation to a certain extent. a. This creates room for new investment opportunities and stimulates economic growth. b. The political economy of information and communication also leads us to consider that change makers can use social media tools like blogging and social networking sites to resist autocratic Government or evasive business establishments. The different challenges of Political Economy under the Information and Communication Technology are: a. The "digital divide" creates an inequality in the political economy, triggering imbalances in information distribution, unawareness of developmental policies, and unequal resource distribution. b. With the imbalance in media ownership and the entry of political and business conglomerates in this sector, the same people who create information are sometimes the policymakers; hence, information as a resource is used in their favour. c. The political economy of power can create an imbalance of power distribution and trigger mass protests since control over information and communication technology can also control the mindset of the people to a certain extent and guide their thoughts and ideas.
14.12 LET US SUM IT UP
We have learned the concepts and evolution of Political economy. Political economy is not a simplistic concept that can be learned in isolation. Rather, to understand this concept in the present-day scenario, we must understand the social structure, the broad ecology of economics and the ownership patterns of media institutions that determine the psychology of the people. Towards the later part, we have also understood the factors and challenges of communication technology and created a suggested ground of balance in the system.

A nalysis of Participation 14.13 KEYWORDS Electronic Numerical : This was the first programmable, electronic, Integrator Analyzer and general-purpose digital computer, completed in Computer (ENIAC) 1945. Intellectual property Rights : The legal privileges granted to the creator or inventor to keep their work secret for a predetermined amount of time. Spatialization : Is the spatial forms that social activities and material things, phenomena or processes take on in geography, sociology, urban planning, and cultural studies. Structuralism : The body of knowledge about human existence and the natural world that emphasises relationships. Karl Marx : Thinker and philosopher Karl Marx is best known for his theories, which led to the development of Marxism, which served as the basis of communism.
14.14 FURTHER READINGS
1. Waligorski, C. P. (2021). The political theory of conservative economists.
University Press of Kansas.
2. Walter, A., & Sen, G. (2008). Analysing the global political economy. Princeton
University Press.
3. Weingast, B. R., & Wittman, D. (2008). The Oxford handbook of political
economy. Oxford University Press.
4. Jones, R. J. (2001). Routledge encyclopaedia of international political economy:
Entries A-F. Taylor & Francis.
5. (2018). Just a moment... https://www.oecd.org/digital/bridging-the-digital-gender-
divide.pdf
6. Mosco, V. (2009). The political economy of communication. SAGE.
14.15 FURTHER READINGS
1. Kawamata, T. (2019). "Geo-Political Economy & Culture" and Connected
Life in Asian I&CT Markets. https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/205188/
1/Kawamata.pdf
2. Avgerou, C., Hayes, N., & La Rovere, R. L. (2016). Growth in ICT uptake
in developing countries: new users, new uses, new challenges. Journal of Information Technology, 31(4), 329-333. https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/
10.1057/s41265-016-0022-6.pdf

3. Ojo, T. (2020). Political economy of ICT4D and Africa. In Handbook of Political Economy of ICTS
communication for development and social change (pp. 1243-1255). Singapore: Springer Singapore.
4. Espana, S., Hulst, W., Jansen, N., & Pargmam, D. (2023, June). Untangling
the relationship between degrowth and ICT. In 2023 International Conference on ICT for Sustainability (ICT4S) (pp. 1-12). IEEE.
5. Hammett, D. (2018). Introduction: technology and development: optimism,
pessimism or potential? International Development Planning Review, 40(3), 227-238.6. Eckardt, M. (2021). The Impact of ICT on policies, politics, and polities--
An evolutionary economics approach to Information and communication technologies (ICT) (pp. 37-52). Springer International Publishing. https:// www.andrassyuni.eu/pubfile/de-223-awp32eckardtfinal.pdf
7. Hart, J. A. (2010). Information Technologies and the Global Political Economy.
In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of International Studies.
8. Eriksson, J., & Newlove-Eriksson, L. M. (2021). Theorizing technology and
international relations: Prevailing perspectives and new horizons. In Technology and international relations (pp. 3-22). Edward Elgar Publishing. https:// www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1639149/FULLTEXT01.pdf
9. Brass, I., & Hornsby, D. J. (2019). Digital technological innovation and the
international political economy. The Palgrave Handbook of Contemporary International Political Economy, 615-631. https://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/id/eprint/ 10045803/3/Brass_Digital%20Tech%20Innovation%20and%20IPE_ Brass%2C%20Hornsby_Revised%20Final.pdf
10. Roztocki, N., Soja, P., & Weistroffer, H. R. (2019). The role of information
and communication technologies in socioeconomic development: towards a multi- dimensional framework. Information Technology for Development, 25(2), 171-183. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/02681102.2019.1596654
14.16 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check your progress 1 i. The approach encompasses the study of the social relations, associations, and power relations that eventually constitute the production, distribution, and consumption of resources, including communication resources. ii. Marxian and utopian socialists developed a potent critique of the classical viewpoint, pointing out the theoretical flaws and the human destruction caused by laws passed in its name. Workers' and other social movements, which expanded intellectual criticism by embracing the democratic forces emerging in reaction to the Industrial Revolution, encouraged and sustained their radical response. This is the radical critique of Political Economy.

Analysis of Participation Check Your Progress 2
i. Based on the types of ownership patterns and the emphasis on power, there are different types of media ownership. They are: a. Chain ownership implies ownership when a single chain of media conglomerates owns numerous outlets in a single medium. For instance, Radio Mirchi has outlets across India, and News 18 owns media outlets across different regions. b. Cross-ownership implies a kind of ownership in which the same corporation or conglomerate owns several media platforms, such as newspapers, e- magazines, web portals, television channels, radio, and so on. For example, the Times group, under the Bennet and Coleman group, owns the Times Now News Channel, Times of India newspaper, and Radio Channels. c. Conglomerate ownership implies the ownership of several business enterprises, among which media is one. d. Vertical integration indicates that a media company can often control the production of the resources that go into making the media content. For example, a newspaper publisher may own the Internet domains if the business concern is releasing a particular web portal. Similar is the ownership of cable networks by news. ii. The final ten years of the 20th century were both the greatest and the worst in terms of public service education since the history of devices creates a ground whereby it begins to keep track of objects and generate data. Starting from the first electrical digital computer in history, the Atanasoff-Berry Computer (ABC), which debuted in 1942, the advent of computing and IT in the US set off the era of Information technology. Post-World War II, computers replaced traditional bookkeeping and accounting methods, even with the ABC being
reintroduced and the Electronic Numerical Integrator Analyzer and Computer
(ENIAC) being deployed to assist with firing table preparation. Not long after vacuum tubes were replaced by transistors in the 1950s, with microchips, floppy disks and now drives, information sharing has become an extended part of human life. Application-based technology and the subsequent evolution of new business models and applications exist almost everywhere. Check your progress 3 a. Despite the recent global economic crisis, there has been an upward trend; yet country-level data on computer, mobile phone, and ICT diffusion rates vary across different countries and areas. This also determines the power play and subsequent ownership of these ICT tools that are influential in the socio- economic era and the political front. In a gist, this is the broad concept of the political economy of ICT. b. The different challenges of Political Economy under the Information and Communication Technology are: i. The "digital divide" creates an inequality in the political economy, triggering imbalances in information distribution, unawareness of developmental policies, 250 and unequal resource distribution.

ii. With the imbalance in media ownership and the entry of political and business Political Economy of ICTS conglomerates in this sector, the same people who create information are sometimes the policymakers; hence, information as a resource is used in their favour. iii. The political economy of power can create an imbalance of power distribution and trigger mass protests since control over information and communication technology can also control the mindset of the people to a certain extent and guide their thoughts and ideas.


======================================================================
=== SOURCE: MNM-031E.pdf ===
======================================================================

MNM-031
Internet Research
Indira Gandhi National Open University
School of Journalism and New Media Studies Methods
BLOCK 1
Digital Research Methods 7
BLOCK 2
Internet Research Methods-I 89
BLOCK 3
Internet Research Methods-II 167
BLOCK 4
Analysing and Interpreting Data 221

Disclaimer: Any materials and images adapted from web-based resources in this self-learning course material are being used for educational purposes only and not for commercial purposes.
PROGRAMME COORDINATOR: Prof. K.S. Arul Selvan
BLOCK 1
Unit 1 Chhavi Garg, Unit Dr. Anubhav Mathur,
Assistant Professor, Department 5 Associate Professor, Department of
of Mass Communication and Media Studies, Bennett University,
Media Studies, Central University Greater Noida, UP
of Punjab, Bathinda, Punjab
Unit 2 Dr. Sonali Srivastav, Unit Dr. Poarkodi Natarajan,
& 12 Assistant Professor 8 Assistant Professor, Department of
National Institute of Fashion Visual Communication,
Technology Loyola College, Chennai
Panchkula, Haryana
Unit 9 Dr. Anupa Lahkar Unit Dr. Jayaseelan R
Post Doctoral fellow 10 Assistant Professor
ICSSR New Delhi Department of Communication, PSG
College of Arts and Science
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
Unit 3, Adopted from MAJMC of Unit Adopted from E-PGPathshala, Ministry
4, 6, 7, SOJNMS, IGNOU 11, of Education, Govt of India 14, 16 13 & & 17 15
Unit Prof. Nandini Lakshmikanth
18 Former Director, Manipal Institute
of Communication, Manipal
University, Manipal
PRODUCTION TEAM
Mr. Sanjay Agarwal
Asst. Registrar
MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi
May, 2024 (c) Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2024
ISBN:
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. Further information on the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University's office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi. Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi. Laser Typeset by Tessa Media & Computers, C-206, A.F.E.-II, Okhla, New Delhi.

Contents
BLOCK 1 DIGITAL RESEARCH METHODS 7
UNIT 1 Internet Media Research 9
UNIT 2 Internet Research Traditions 25
UNIT 3 Identification of Research Problems 38
UNIT 4 Sources of Data 52
UNIT 5 Online Sampling Methods 73
BLOCK 2 INTERNET RESEARCH METHODS-I 89
UNIT 6 Interview Method 91
UNIT 7 Experimental Research Methods 105
UNIT 8 Visual Analysis 120
UNIT 9 Social Network Analysis 138
BLOCK 3 INTERNET RESEARCH METHODS-II 167
UNIT 10 Web Archiving 169
UNIT 11 Textual Analysis 189
UNIT 12 Online Ethnography 198
UNIT 13 Narrative Analysis 211
BLOCK 4 ANALYSING AND INTERPRETING DATA 221
UNIT 14 Fundamentals of Data Analysis 223
UNIT 15 Digital Data Analysis 238
UNIT 16 Data Interpretation 263
UNIT 17 Reporting Writing 285
UNIT 18 Ethics of Internet Research 301

COURSE INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technology advancements have revolutionised our daily routine communication activities and created a new academic discipline called Internet studies. This discipline is all about human communication and its allied activities in cyberspace. It is a stronger interaction between human beings and technological platforms. This unique combination requires a separate understanding to study on this platform, the same as the case of data collection tools. This is precisely what this course describes: the research methods and data collection tools and their techniques. This course has four blocks and 18 units, and it is the MNM031 Internet Research Methods of MA in Journalism and Digital Media programme. Let's briefly understand the whole structure of the course. Block 1 Digital Research Methods would give a broader orientation on the basics of Internet research processes. In Unit 1, "Internet Mediated Research," we explore Internet research's evolution, significance, and challenges. Discover methodologies crucial in journalism while navigating ethical considerations. Moving to Unit 2, "Internet Research Traditions," uncover the multifaceted realm of Internet studies, exploring its scope, characteristics, and methodologies like digital ethnography and data analytics. In Unit 3, "Identification of Research Problems," learn the critical process of selecting and formulating research inquiries, emphasising literature reviews and crafting research questions. Unit 4, "Sources of Data," explores primary and secondary data gathering methods, including Internet and library searches. Finally, in Unit 5, "Online Sampling Methods," we explore probability and non-probability sampling techniques, exploring various methods and addressing ethical considerations in Internet-based survey sampling. Block 2 of Internet Research Methods - I would clarify various data collection tools. In Unit 6 explains about the techniques of interview and online sampling methods, and the multifaceted realm of interview techniques. From informal to structured interviews, including telephonic and online surveys, we will navigate various formats while emphasising interviewing skills and ethical considerations. Unit 7 takes you into "Experiment Methods," exploring classic research designs and the intricate experimental process. We will discuss controlling extraneous variables and randomisation, exploring experimental design variations, and field experiments. In Unit 8, Visual Analysis, we will understand the complexities of perception and interpretation in images, exploring methodologies like Semiotics and Discourse Analysis and examining historical, contextual, and personal dimensions. In Unit 9, "Social Media Analysis," we explore the intricate web of digital interactions, exploring Social Network Analysis, Data Management, and Network Theories in Cultural Anthropology. Block 3 Internet Research Methods II, continues the discussion from the previous Block. Yet another set of data collection tools are explained in this Block. In Unit 10, "Web Archiving: Understanding Internet Histories and Beyond," we uncover the significance of preserving digital footprints.

Discuss the origins, ethical considerations, and pivotal role of web archiving in Internet history research. Unit 11 introduces "Textual Analysis," where we navigate diverse perspectives, types, and presentation methods. Learn effective strategies for collecting and analysing texts while understanding the importance of interpretation. Unit 12 engages us in "Online Ethnography," examining qualitative and quantitative methods in the digital realm into ethical considerations and responsibilities essential for navigating this intricate field. Lastly, in Unit 13, "Narrative Analysis," we decode the layers of meaning within personal and collective stories. Explore methods for collection and analysis, unravelling the social dimensions of narratives. Block 4 Analysing and Interpreting Data provides a better understanding of data analysis and interpretation. In Unit 14, "Fundamentals of Data Analysis," we explore the core concepts shaping modern research methodologies. From handling quantitative data to qualitative analysis techniques, we unravel the intricacies of organising, summarising, and testing hypotheses. Moving forward to Unit 15, "Digital Data Analysis," we will understand through data retrieval and harvesting techniques within Digital Media Research Methods. Learn to refine search results tailored to your research goals amidst the vast expanse of digital information. Unit 16 focuses on data interpretation, empowering you with statistical principles to interpret data confidently. From frequency distribution to measures of central tendency, grasp the tools needed for precise analysis. In Unit 17, we will explore the report writing essentials, guiding you through crafting comprehensive reports from captivating titles to presenting findings effectively. Lastly, Unit 18 addresses "Ethics in Internet Research," examining fundamental principles governing research ethics and the nuances of researching digital platforms. Despite the changing technological features of the Internet, human communication remains the same. Modes have changed, but the core values of human interactions continue as before. The new tools and technologies of digital data collection will broaden our understanding of the deeper nuances of individual interactions through online spaces.

Block
DIGITAL RESEARCH METHODS
UNIT 1
Internet Mediated Research
UNIT 2
Internet Research Traditions
UNIT 3
Identification of Research Problems
UNIT 4
Sources of Data
UNIT 5
Online Sampling Methods

BLOCK 1 INTRODUCTION
In this first Block, you will learn the basic concepts of Internet research traditions and overall trends of Internet research in the recent past. With these understandings, you will learn about the fundamental process of research exercise--identifying a research problem. Once you have identified your problem, you must know the required data and how to collect it. All these areas are discussed in this Block.
Unit 1 Internet Mediated Research, explores Internet research's evolution,
significance, and challenges alongside its interdisciplinary nature. This Unit gives an understanding of its pivotal role in journalism and explores methodologies, distinguishing qualitative from quantitative approaches while navigating ethical considerations. It also takes you to the global perspective and integrates technology seamlessly into your research endeavours.
Unit 2 Internet Research Traditions explores into the multifaceted realm of
studying the Internet, covering its scope, characteristics, and prevalent issues. It explores the phases of Internet research, from technical challenges to its societal impacts and future advancements. It uncovers methodologies like online surveys, digital ethnography, and data analytics that are crucial for understanding and theorising the Internet's intricate dynamics.
Unit 3 Identification of Research Problems, we will learn the critical
process of selecting and formulating research inquiries. We explore distinctions between social and research problems, emphasise the significance of literature reviews, and discuss factors like relevance, feasibility, and achievability. Additionally, we address crafting research questions, objectives, and hypotheses and defining terms of enquiry such as concepts, constructs, variables, and operational definitions.
Unit 4 Sources of Data, explores primary and secondary data, exploring
Internet and library searches as secondary data sources. Additionally, we will uncover methods for gathering primary data and discuss essential practices for storing and saving your valuable data.
Unit 5 Online Sampling Methods takes you into probability and non-
probability sampling techniques, explores the steps involved in online sampling, dissects various methods, analyses the characteristics of effective online surveys, and discusses sampling for interviews, focus group discussions and social networks. We'll also touch on mixed-mode surveys and the advantages of online data collection and address the ethical considerations and challenges in Internet-based survey sampling. We hope you will better understand Internet research by learning about Internet research traditions and basic ideas for research activities.

UNIT 1 INTERNET MEDIATED RESEARCH
Research Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Learning Outcomes
1.2 Overview of Internet Research
1.2.1 Definition and Evolution of Internet Research
1.2.2 Milestones in Internet Research
1.2.3 Contemporary Significance
1.2.4 Challenges and Opportunities
1.3 Interdisciplinary Nature of Internet Research
1.3.1 Global Perspectives
1.3.2 Integration of Technology and Research
1.4 Role of Internet Research in Journalism
1.5 Internet Research Methodologies
1.5.1 Qualitative vs. Quantitative Approaches
1.5.2 Choosing the Right Methodology
1.5.3 Cross-Cultural Methodological Considerations
1.6 Ethical Guidelines in Methodology
1.7 Let Us Sum Up
1.8 Keywords
1.9 Further Readings
1.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answer
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The Internet has become an integral part of human lives. It is used to remain in touch with friends and family through social networking sites and plan one's health through health-specific Internet applications. This widespread integration of the Internet is still in process and has primarily started few decades back, though the Internet was first used in the 1990s. Moreover, this Internet usage is not limited to any particular age group or socio-economic group; almost everyone uses it for varied purposes. Being online has become a necessity in the present as most information and services are available online. This online interaction of numerous users has given rise to online communities and an online world, which is being termed a 'virtual world'. Since these online communities and virtual worlds have a direct effect on human lives, research in this area has also become an essential part of communication and media research. Internet research is emerging as a new area of research for academicians and researchers in the field of media and communication. All aspects related to the Internet, whether usage patterns, the kind of content generated online, or the different types of users themselves, have become subjects for Internet

Digital Research research. This unit aims to provide an overview of Internet research, its Methods evolution, and the present trends in this area of research. It also attempts to underline methodological debates and ethical concerns discussed in Internet research.
1.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Understand the meaning and evolution of Internet research; * Analyse research trends in Internet research; * Comprehend the nature of Internet research; and * Gain an insight into methodological debates and ethical concerns in Internet research.
1.2 OVERVIEW OF INTERNET RESEARCH
Internet research is an emerging area in communication and media research at present. Under Internet research, researchers are exploring all aspects of Internet usage, their users, and the audio-video content generated by users. Even the political, economic, and social issues that affect Internet usage and emerge from Internet usage are being studied under internet research as these issues play an important role in overall Internet usage. For instance, under social issues, it is being studied which group, according to age, gender or race, is accessing the Internet, whereas, under political issues, the actions or policies of the government in different countries are being analysed to understand the repercussions of these actions or policies on the usage pattern of users in a specific country. The following sections will discuss the evolution of Internet research and its significance in detail:-
1.2.1 Definition and Evolution of Internet Research
As the name suggests, Internet research deals with understanding the medium of the Internet, encompassing all its aspects. Since its development in the 1990s among the public, the Internet as a medium has been evolving, and hence, research on the Internet is also evolving with the medium. One of the initial fundamental questions of concern before researchers was understanding the nature of the Internet as a medium, whether it was an interpersonal medium or a mass medium. Usage of the Internet has shown that the answer is not either, but both, as the Internet can be used as an interpersonal and mass medium. Other main aspects of the Internet are its varied usage, different types of users, the content generated on it and the social, political and economic issues related to it. Regarding research approaches in Internet research, Hewson, Vogel, and Laurent (2016) mention that quantitative approaches dominated the early studies in Internet research, while qualitative approaches gained momentum after some time in the field. A mixed-methods approach is also being followed in some research studies to follow breadth and depth in the area.

One of the points that needs to be noted is that in the beginning, the Internet Research was seen just as a tool for data collection rather than as a site for research. Initially, the Internet was considered just one media used to collect data through online questionnaires or interview schedules. This kind of research is also termed Internet-mediated research. Not only for primary data collection, but news reports and other documents, which were initially offline, were also searched on the Internet as an extension of newspapers, magazines, and other media, but no new data was looked at on the Internet. The reliability of the data collected through the Internet, primarily through emails, was also questioned as, in the beginning, researchers did not rely on online mode (though concerns remain even now). It was only in the last decade that the Internet is seen as having much more to offer than just being a tool for data collection. With the increasing use of the Internet, it has emerged as a critical area of research in the field of media and communication. Hence, now all its aspects, from its use to users to its effects, are being studied under Internet research.
1.2.2 Milestones in Internet Research
As mentioned earlier, Internet research is emerging as an area of research with the development and evolution of the Internet. Having publicly announced this for the first time in the 1990s, research started after this period. Further, as the medium evolved, researchers also got many aspects to research as many Internet-based applications emerged with specific target audiences. The following table shows the milestones in Internet research:- Developments in Internet Developments in online social technologies research methods 1960s Development of early forms of computer-mediated communication. 1962: Licklider sets out a vision for a 'Galactic' or 'Global' 'Information Network'. 1970s 1973: The first mobile phone was demonstrated (Dr Martin Cooper of Motorola). 1979: First commercially automated cellular network (Tokyo, Japan). 1980s 1983: first commercial handheld 1986: Kiesler and Sproull undertake (not linked to a car) mobile phone an online survey (Kiesler & Sproull, (the DynaTAC 8000x). 1989: 1986). Demonstration of the World Wide The invention of the first computer Web by Tim Berners-Lee. packages for the analysis of qualitative data.

Digital Research 1990- 1990: public release of the World 1993: Rheingold uses the term Methods
1994 Wide Web. 'cyberspace'.
1990: The first search tool for the 1994: Foster conducts online web (Archie) was created. 1993: asynchronous interviews using email. The first web crawler (Wanderer) 1994: First methodological discussion was created. of online interviewing (Brotherson, 1993: First graphical browser 1994). (Mosaic). 1995: Journal of Computer-Mediated 1994: Netscape browser launched. Communication began publication. 1994: Development of the first popular search engines (Alta Vista, Lycos, Excite and Yahoo). 1995- 1995: Internet Explorer launched. 1995: Correll writes about 'Internet 1999 1995: The first public video ethnographies'. conference took place. 1995: First online web experiment 1996: Instant messaging services conducted. launched. 1995: First comprehensive list of 1997: Google released the 1997 online psychological experiments first weblog (blog), which is published on the web. attributed to Jorn Barger's Robot 1996: The explosion of debate around Wisdom website. 1997: online research ethics with papers SixDegrees.com is launched. Often published by Allen, Boehlefeld, King, seen as the first social networking Reid and Thomas (Allen 1996; site. Boehlefeld 1996; King 1996; Reid 1996; Thomas 1996). 1997: Krantz et al. published an online psychology experiment in an academic journal (Krantz et al.,
1997) .
1997: The World Wide Web and
Contemporary Cultural Theory
conference occurred at Drake University. 2000- 2000: 400 million people across 2000: Launch of the Association of 2004 the globe use the Internet. Internet Researchers. 2001: First commercial launch of 2000: Publication of a number of key 3G (Third Generation) mobile texts in the field, such as Mail and phones. Internet Surveys. The Tailored 2001: The first Access Grid was Design Method (Dillman, 2000); developed at the University of Virtual Ethnography (Hine, 2000); Manchester. Internet communication and qualitative research: A handbook for 2003: Myspace launched. 2004: researching online (Mann & Stewart,
Development of Voice
2000) .
Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) 2001: The Internet Research telephone service. Handbook 2004: Mozilla Firefox web browser published (O'Dochartaigh, 2001). released (the 2nd most popular 2002: Publication of Online Social current browser after Internet Sciences (Batinic et al., 2002); Explorer).
Internet Research Methods, Hewson,
2004: O'Reilly uses the term 'web Yule, Laurent and Vogel 2003);
2.0'.
Standards for Internet-Based
2004: Facebook launched. Experimenting (Reips, 2002a). 2002: Publication of the Association of Internet Researchers guidelines on

online research ethics (Ess, 2002). Internet Mediated Research 2005- 2006: Twitter launched. 2005: Virtual Methods (Hine, 2005) 2009 2007: iPhone launched. 2006: International Journal of Internet Science begins publication. 2008: Google Chrome browser launched. 2008: The Handbook of Online Research Methods (Fielding et al.,
2008) .
2009- 2010: iPad launched. 2009: Publication of Netnography: 2011 2011: The number of Internet users Doing Ethnographic Research Online is estimated at 2 billion worldwide. (Kozinets, 2009) and Online Research Essentials (Russell & Purcell, 2009). Table 1:- Milestones in Internet research (Source: Hooley, T., Marriott, J. & Wallens, J. (2012). What is online research?: using the Internet for social science research. Bloomsbury Academic. ) Recent developments in the period of 2011-2024: Period Developments in Internet Developments in online social research technologies methods 2011- 2012: Introduction of 2011: Introduction of new online research
2014 Google Glass wearable methodologies to adapt to the changing
technology. landscape of social media platforms. 2012: Introduction of 4G 2012: Integration of social media data into LTE (Long-Term traditional research methodologies for a more Evolution) mobile comprehensive understanding of online networks. behaviour. 2013: Introduction of 2013: Emergence of advanced data analytics Snapchat, a multimedia tools for processing large volumes of social messaging app. media data, enabling more in-depth analysis and insights. 2014: Introduction of 2014: Implementation of mixed-methods Amazon Echo, a smart approaches combining online surveys, speaker with voice interviews, and social media analysis for a assistant technology. holistic research perspective. 2015- 2015: Introduction of 5G 2015: Expansion of qualitative research 2019 networks, promising faster methodologies to include virtual ethnography internet speeds and lower and netnography, leveraging the immersive latency. nature of online environments. 2016: Introduction of 2016: Increased focus on ethical Pokemon Go, a mobile considerations in online social research, with augmented reality game. the development of guidelines and frameworks to ensure participant privacy and data security. 2017: Introduction of 2017: Integration of machine learning and Bitcoin and blockchain natural language processing techniques in technology for online social research for automated sentiment decentralised transactions. analysis and topic modelling.

2018: Introduction of 2018: Adoption of longitudinal studies to track Methods GDPR (General Data changes in online behaviour and attitudes over Protection Regulation) for time, providing insights into evolving social data privacy. dynamics. 2019: Introduction of 5G- 2019: Collaboration between academia and enabled smartphones with industry to develop innovative research enhanced connectivity. methods utilising social media APIs and big data analytics platforms. 2020- 2020: Accelerated digital 2020: Rapid adoption of remote research 2024 transformation due to the methodologies such as online focus groups COVID-19 pandemic. and virtual interviews to comply with social distancing measures. 2021: Introduction of AI- 2021: Advancements in mixed-methods powered voice assistants research designs combining qualitative and for smart home devices. quantitative approaches to capture nuanced insights from online interactions. 2022: Introduction of 6G 2022: Exploration of novel research avenues technology in select such as digital ethnography and participatory regions, promising even action research in online communities to faster speeds. engage with diverse perspectives. 2023: Expansion of the 2023: Implementation of cross-disciplinary Internet of Things (IoT) collaborations integrating social sciences, ecosystem with computer science, and data analytics to tackle interconnected devices. complex research questions in online environments. 2024: Emergence of 2024: Emphasis on transparency and decentralised social media reproducibility in online social research, with platforms based on initiatives promoting open data sharing and blockchain technology. methodological documentation for scholarly rigour and accountability.
1.2.3 Contemporary Significance
The Internet has become such an integral part of human lives that the future of society can be delineated from it. Almost all everyday activities of its users involve the use of the Internet. Hence, the significance of Internet research is bound to only increase. After the announcement of the Internet public in the early 1990s, the generation born after and growing with it can not imagine living without the Internet as it has become such an intrinsic part of their lives. Therefore, if we want to understand the development of human society in the present times, we need to understand Internet usage among its users. The generation that came after the Internet and the generation that may be termed the elderly group have also started using the Internet to a large extent as they need to interact with their children through the Internet. Even the issues and concerns that used to exist in the larger communities have also been transferred into 14 the online sphere. We may take the example of the digital divide, where some

people can access the Internet while others cannot, owing to social and Research economic factors. It may be seen as an extension of the depravity of one more resource among some people while others are using and enjoying the resources. Similarly, we may see that bullying, which used to happen in the real world, has gone online, with 'cyber-bullying' emerging as a concern in the virtual world. Hence, Internet research is the need of the hour as the Internet has almost become one of the most important ways to remain connected with immediate family members, friends, and the outside world.
1.2.4 Challenges and Opportunities
Since Internet research is still a comparatively new field of research in communication and media, some challenges are bound to exist for the researchers. One of the most critical challenges is the representation of diversity on the Internet. The reach and access to the Internet have increased very fast in the last decade, but the spread of Internet access has not been uniform. Most of the countries in the eastern developing world are still struggling to provide Internet access to all in their countries, whereas the western world of developed countries are dominating in access to digital technologies. Not only in the case of countries, the Internet is not accessible even now across various categories, including gender, class, caste or race. This digital divide, the gap between the 'haves' and 'have-nots, has made it challenging to have representational samples through the Internet or to take up the issues being discussed on public online forums as issues of the general people. Hence, researchers in this field need to consider the socio-economic profile of Internet users and decide who is included in the studies or the samples collected through the Internet. Kaufmann and Tzanetakis (2020) say that it is not only the researcher who needs to take care of fair representation or social barriers of respondents but also the environment in which researchers and respondents create, and the online tools that are used all contribute to making Internet research a credible one. Another essential aspect emerging as a challenging issue is the reliability of the data collected online. In Internet research, data collection is mostly done online (not to say that data collection does not happen offline in Internet research). Hence, the reliability of data collected, primarily through asynchronous mode, is raising a concern. In asynchronous mode, a questionnaire or interview schedule is generally shared with the respondent on one's email account, and the respondent would usually respond to it whenever one is free. However, since the researcher and respondent do not come face-to-face like in synchronous mediated communication, how much the data can be relied on might be questioned as somebody in place of the original respondent has filled out the questionnaire or under which circumstances the respondent has filled out the questionnaire, the researcher does not get to know. Hence, the researcher needs to devise a strategy to check the reliability of data collected online. Internet research has opened up many opportunities, too, as it has connected the whole world. Researchers conducting Internet research and through the Internet can reach respondents sitting in far-off areas. For instance, a researcher sitting in India is no longer limited to doing research on topics

Digital Research related to India or people living in India; one can explore all the topics which Methods are of one's interest without caring to think much about reaching the respondents as the respondents who are living in far-off geographical areas can be reached through online platforms. The usage of the Internet has not only blurred geographical boundaries but also has enabled reach among people with certain specific socio-psychological variables. These people can be reached through social media platforms as people with specific common interests or profiles have their online communities. Reaching respondents online also rationalises the use of resources for researchers as they usually have a shortage of resources in terms of both money and time. Along similar lines, even archives are also available online to access different documents for research related to secondary data. Even for literature reviews, most journals are accessible online. E-books, too, have come for researchers to read without needing to reach out offline every time. Similarly, respondents sometimes do not want to open up about specific issues in face-to-face interactions, but they feel comfortable with mediated communication. Hence, it becomes easy to reach such a population through the Internet. Most of the time, data in Internet research is collected online using different software. This online software enables the transcription of data independently rather than spending money or time again after the data collection. For instance, when an interview with a respondent is conducted online, either in synchronous or asynchronous mode, it would be recorded independently (the respondent needs to be informed about it under ethical guidelines). Even many online tools enable the calculations/analysis of data with just a few commands on the software. Hence, processing large data sets in Internet research becomes more accessible and quicker. Therefore, the Internet has opened up a plethora of opportunities for researchers. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the challenges being faced by researchers in Internet research?

2. Discuss some points that may be considered as opportunities in Internet
research.

Activity: 1 Research
1. Read any one research article related to Internet Research and analyse it.

3. Try to identify which aspect of the Internet is studied in the article.

1.3 INTERDISCIPLINARY NATURE OF
INTERNET RESEARCH
Internet research is truly interdisciplinary. Not only can fields of social sciences like psychology, sociology, and economics be combined to understand Internet research, but technology-oriented fields like computer science and computational sciences can also be used to comprehend the field of Internet research.
1.3.1 Global Perspectives
The Internet is a medium which makes the world a real global one, as almost everyone seems to be connected to others through it. Since the Internet, among other digital technologies, emerged in the developed world, perspectives and research studies have also been brought in from Western countries. However, as the Internet is becoming more accessible in developing countries, research studies are also being conducted in these countries as users are becoming more frequent, and their uses vary in nature and purpose. Listing different areas which are being explored under the interdisciplinary nature of Internet research, Kim & Weaver (2002) write about how individuals and organisations are using the Internet, how the usage of the Internet affects traditional and other media, how the Internet is being used in politics, education and marketing, legal and economic issues and advancements in technology. Further, Kim & Weaver (2002) note that initial research studies in Internet research focused on the medium itself and historical and philosophical issues of development of the medium, whereas more recent studies attempt to understand the use of the Internet and its effects. Observing that research journals play an important role in bringing researchers related to Internet research together at common platforms.

Digital Research 1.3.2 Integration of Technology and Research
Methods The Internet is essentially a technological medium that has connected millions of people quickly, unlike any other technology of earlier times. In the field of media and communication, technological advancements have always remained important as these developments decide the content of the medium to a large extent. For instance, printing newspapers has undergone many changes over time to make printing much easier and quicker. This printing technology has affected the content of newspapers too, as with advanced technology, more updates till late at night could be accommodated with ease, and more colourful pages could be made, resulting in more photographs from earlier times. Similarly, technological advancements in the Internet have provided innumerable opportunities for users to interact with each other; they can access information and actively create content on the Internet. The Internet is emerging as a technological medium in which there is no standardised content like newspapers or television, but there is such a diversity in the content available on the Internet that various aspects can be researched. From the time spent on the Internet by users to the kind of websites they browse, every move of users on the Internet has become a potential topic of interest and research for researchers. Along with a range of topics in Internet research, research methods have evolved with the coming of the Internet. Online ethnography can be seen as one example of the integration of technology and research. Traditional ethnography initiated by anthropologists requires researchers to immerse themselves in the field by living in the community for a certain time. In online ethnography, a researcher immerses themselves in online communities by observing the interaction of members in these online communities and participating in the interaction themselves.
1.4 ROLE OF INTERNET RESEARCH IN
JOURNALISM
Journalism has remained one of the oldest fields of media and communication, though the same cannot be said about research in the field. With the coming of the Internet, journalism as a field is seeing many changes as most newspapers have started their e-papers and web portals. Further, influential public figures, including political leaders, have posted their statements online. Hence, journalists have also begun considering verified social media accounts as one of their sources. Many aspects of the Internet have started affecting the field of journalism. Research studies on usage patterns of online media by journalists, changes in coverage of newspapers due to emerging social media, and digital skills of journalists are some of the topics on which research is being conducted in the broad area of Internet research in journalism. Citizen journalism has become very common, as with easy access to digital technologies, citizens can post their concerns and issues directly on different online platforms. Although citizens post their content online with quick and easy access to digital technologies, almost everyone's concerns regarding misinformation and disinformation have also emerged. Misinformation is

false information that is spread, whereas disinformation is false information Research that is spread or forwarded with intent. Hence, the spread of this kind of information has also been studied many times. People spreading this kind of information do it in the garb of journalism, calling in twin challenges as they raise the trust and credibility of journalism among readers or audiences, and another is that this kind of information may harm the society by spreading false information.
1.5 INTERNET RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES
Deciding on research methodology is one of the most critical steps in any research process. In that case, if the researcher does not use the appropriate research methodology, the whole study may be a failure, as the aim of the study would not be fulfilled without choosing the appropriate research methodology. Hence, the following sections discuss the different research approaches and some strategies for choosing the most appropriate approach for your study:-
1.5.1 Qualitative vs. Quantitative Approaches
A quantitative approach to research in social sciences is taken from physical sciences and aims to measure the concepts under study in numbers. Under this approach, the most used research method is a survey, in which a questionnaire is generally used as a research tool to collect data. Initial studies in Internet research followed quantitative approaches as many researchers from the field of technology-sciences took up research studies on the Internet. Experiments are also conducted using this approach to study different variables. Under qualitative approaches, generally, in-depth interviews are conducted to collect data. In-depth interviews can be conducted through emails or in real- time through audio-video applications. This difference between the two can be termed synchronous and asynchronous communication. In synchronous, the researcher and respondent would be present on an online platform simultaneously, while in asynchronous, the respondent can send one's response easily through email. Both types of communication have some advantages and disadvantages. For instance, conducting in-depth interviews in synchronous mode would have no concerns regarding the reliability of data as the respondent would be present with the researcher, though, at the same time, we need to consider that sometimes respondents in synchronous communication might not be able to open up on some sensitive issues as they would do in asynchronous communication owing to having more time and anonymity to express themselves. However, there might be specific concerns regarding data reliability in asynchronous communication as the researcher cannot ascertain under what circumstances the respondent has sent the response.
1.5.2 Choosing the Right Methodology
The process of research is a long process which starts with identifying a broader research problem, reading literature related to it, identifying the research gap, making specific research objectives or research questions to fill

Digital Research the identified research gap, then deciding on the appropriate research Methods methodology, collecting data as per the decided research methodology and finally analysing the data and presenting the results and coming to a conclusion. Hence, the right way to choose the most appropriate methodology is to consider the study's objectives. Depending on the research's purpose and the study's objectives, an appropriate methodology needs to be chosen. For instance, if your research study aims to encapsulate the width (broader in perspective), then quantitative research methods should be deployed, while if the purpose of your research study is to gain depth on the topic, then qualitative research methods like in-depth interviews should be used. However, in the present times, most studies are taking up a mixed- methods approach to present a balanced perspective on the chosen research topics. In the mixed-methods approach, both quantitative and qualitative research methods are used. These methods may be used sequentially or concurrently. In the sequential type of research, one method would be followed by another, like the quantitative research method of the survey, followed by the qualitative method of in-depth interviews, or vice versa. In concurrent research, both methods are deployed simultaneously, such as asking a respondent to fill out the questionnaire (with close-ended questions) and then asking some open-ended questions in an interview. However, the primary way to choose the correct research method is to keep the research aim in mind and choose the most appropriate methodology to fulfil the aim of the study.
1.5.3 Cross-Cultural Methodological Considerations
Owing to its nature, the Internet has allowed researchers to conduct research across cultures. As discussed in opportunities of Internet research, it may be noted that as the Internet has removed geographical barriers in reaching different respondents, researchers need not limit themselves to their immediate or neighbouring areas. They may explore their research interests across different countries and cultures. However, research across cultures needs to keep specific methodological considerations in mind. Since every culture has its code of conduct and norms, it is always advisable for the researcher to understand the cultural nuances in detail before interacting with the respondents, even if it is through the Internet. At the start of the study, a simple gesture of greetings might make or mar the data collection process as this simple gesture establishes rapport with the respondent and makes them comfortable to share their responses. Similarly, gender norms also play a vital role in research. As an outsider to a culture, the researcher should know how to greet a person, especially of the opposite gender, and even culturally appropriate dress sometimes helps the respondent to open up more quickly. Language also plays a role as communicating in one's tongue becomes comfortable for the respondent and the researcher. Also, it becomes easier to understand non-verbal communication. Hence, the researcher should always attempt to get familiar with the culture of the community before conducting the study among them.

Activity:2 Research
1. Choose any one research article on Internet research and analyse its
research methodology.

2. Identify which type of methodology is used in the article.

1.6 ETHICAL GUIDELINES IN METHODOLOGIES
(Refer to Unit 18 for the detailed discussion on ethics in online research) Like any kind of research, ethical guidelines are also an important part of Internet research. Discussion on ethical guidelines in Internet research becomes even more relevant as guidelines are still being debated since the Internet is a comparatively new medium and its usage is evolving. One of the most important aspects of ethics in Internet research remains obtaining informed consent from respondents. In any kind of survey interview or even experimental study, respondents need to be informed before the start of the study about the purpose of the study and give their consent for participation in the study. Respondents also need to be told that they may leave the study at any time if they want to leave during data collection. This informed consent becomes comparatively easier to take in face-to-face communication as sometimes, in mediated communication, especially in asynchronous communication, respondents might not fully understand the purpose of the study. In the case of content analysis, where the respondents have decided to share the content of their private social media accounts, the researcher needs to obtain informed consent beforehand and discuss the purpose of the study in detail with the respondents. Another important aspect is maintaining the anonymity of the respondents and the confidentiality of data collected from the respondents. In most of the studies, we ensure the respondents that their identity and the data collected from them would be used only for academic purposes and that both their identity and the data collected would be kept confidential, especially in areas of a sensitive nature. In Internet research, maintaining this confidentiality might be a bit of a concern as data is stored digitally, and there might be apprehensions about their leak or access by somebody other than the researcher.

Digital Research Analysing content available on online public forums has emerged as an Methods essential area of Internet research. However, some academicians are discussing ethical guidelines for using such content as though the content is available on open online public forums. However, still, since the medium of the Internet is new, many of the users are not aware of its nature. They might have expressed themselves without knowing that the content is available in the public domain and can be used for research purposes. Here, the dilemma can be solved by not revealing the content creator's identity, particularly in sensitive matters. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What ethical guidelines do you keep in mind when doing Internet
research?

1.7 LET US SUM UP
Internet research has emerged as an important area of research in the field of media and communication. With the increasing reach and accessibility of the Internet among different populations, it is becoming even more relevant in the present times. In every aspect, from the time spent on the Internet by users to the websites being visited by them to the kind of content created by them, every move of users on the Internet has become a potential research topic. As the use of the Internet is still evolving, the area of Internet research is too developing. Questions regarding choosing the most appropriate research methodology or ethical considerations are still being debated. However, the field of Internet research is bound to become even more interesting as both users of the Internet and researchers in Internet research are exploring the medium and innumerable possibilities.
1.8 KEYWORDS
Online Ethnography: It is a research method in which the researcher immerses himself in online communities by observing the interaction of members in these online communities and participating in the interaction oneself. Synchronous mode: The mode of data collection in which both the researcher and respondent are present online in real time. Asynchronous mode: This is the mode of data collection in which the researcher and respondent are not present online in real-time.

Research
1.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods. Fourth edition. Oxford
University Press.
2. Fricker Jr.,R..D. and Rand,M.S.(2002). Advantages and Disadvantages
of Internet Research Surveys: Evidence from the Literature. Field
Methods, 14(4), 347-367.3. Hewson, C., Vogel, C. & Laurent, D. (2016). Internet research methods.
Second edition. Sage.
4. Hooley, T., Marriott, J. & Wallens, J. (2012). What is online research?:
Using the Internet for social science research. Bloomsbury Academic.
5. Kaufmann, M. and Tzanetakis,M. (2020). Doing Internet research with
hard-to-reach communities: Methodological reflections on gaining meaningful access. Qualitative Research, 20(6), 927-944.6. Kim, S.T. & Weaver, D. (2002). Communication research about the
Internet: a Thematic meta-analysis. New media & society, 4(4), 518-538.7. Tomasello,T.K. (2001). The status of Internet-based research in five
leading communication journals, 1994-1999. J&MC Quarterly, 78 (4), 659-674.1. 10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Most of the countries in the eastern developing world are still struggling
to provide Internet access to all in their countries, whereas the western world of developed countries are dominating in access to digital technologies. Not only in the case of countries, but the Internet is also not accessible even now across various categories, including gender, class, caste or race. This digital divide, the gap between the 'haves' and 'have-nots, has made it challenging to have representational samples through the Internet or to take up the issues being discussed on public online forums as issues of the general people. Hence, researchers in this field need to consider the socio-economic profile of Internet users and decide who is included in the studies or the samples collected through the Internet.
2. Researchers conducting Internet research and through the Internet can
reach respondents sitting in far-off areas. The usage of the Internet has not only blurred geographical boundaries but also has enabled reach among people with certain specific socio-psychological variables. These people can be reached through social media platforms as people with specific common interests or profiles have their online communities. Along similar lines, even archives are also available online to access different documents for research related to secondary data. Even for literature reviews, most journals are accessible online. E-books, too, have

Digital Research come for researchers to read without needing to reach out offline every Methods time. Similarly, respondents sometimes do not want to open up about specific issues in face-to-face interactions, but they feel comfortable with mediated communication. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Ensuring data reliability and ascertaining diversity in the sample are
being seen as challenges in Internet research.
2. Convenience in reaching respondents, the requirement of fewer resources
in terms of money and time, and quicker or automatic data transcription with the help of software are some of the opportunities that researchers can explore in Internet research.
3. It is a research method in which the researcher immerses oneself in
online communities by observing the interaction of members in these online communities and participating in the interaction oneself.
4. Getting informed consent and ensuring the reliability and credibility of
data are some of the ethical guidelines that need to be considered while conducting Internet research.

UNIT 2 INTERNET RESEARCH
Traditions
TRADITIONS
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 Studying the Internet
2.2.1 Categories of Internet Research
2.2.2 Characteristics of the Internet
2.2.3 Issues and Concerns
2.3 Phases of Internet Research
2.3.1 Technical Issues with the Internet
2.3.2 Uses and Users of the Internet
2.3.3 Effects of the Internet
2.3.4 Future Improvements
2.4 Internet Research Methodologies
2.4.1 Online Surveys
2.4.2 Online Interviews
2.4.3 Web Content Analysis
2.4.4 Social Network Analysis
2.4.5 Digital Ethnography
2.4.6 Data Analytics
2.4.7 Online Experiments
2.5 Theorising the Internet
2.6 Let Us Sum Up
2.7 Keywords
2.8 Further Readings
2.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
2.0 INTRODUCTION
In the previous Unit, we discussed the generic overview of the Internet or online research. This Unit continues that by covering the actual academic activities/practices and traditions of Internet/Online research in the recent past. This Unit will introduce you to the vast and unprecedented field of Internet research. Starting by establishing its origins, we will cover various aspects of study while studying the Internet. Moving forward, we will discuss the multiple paradigms covered by the broad discipline of Internet research. Next, you will be presented with traditions and practices adopted by researchers in different phases of the research in this field. We will also discuss different methods to study the Internet over the years. You will also learn to appreciate factors influencing the Internet and those which are, in

Digital Research turn, affected by it. Lastly, discussing the vistas opened by the discipline, Methods from psychology to governance to education and even health, we will try to chart its boundaries.
2.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Describe various paradigms covered by Internet Research; * Identify traditions and practices in different phases of Internet Research; * Evaluate different methods adopted for Internet Research; and * Recognise factors influencing the Internet and vice versa.
2.2 STUDYING THE INTERNET
The Internet is simply understood as a global network of connected computer systems that can communicate. Over 5 billion people worldwide, an estimated 65 per cent of the current world population, are using the Internet. The uses range from tasks related to everyday life to researching and contributing to local and global issues. The Internet has not only expanded geographically, but it has also penetrated the social strata of society, making the user base a vast and heterogeneous body. The diversity in usage patterns, user base and applications has led to the emergence of several issues for inventors, users, and researchers alike. These issues range from privacy concerns, the digital divide and the quality of content being hosted online. The Internet emerges not only as a subject but also as a tool for research and a larger social phenomenon affecting many walks of academia. Internet studies is a comprehensive field of study that encompasses all issues pertaining to the Internet, be it its design, its use, or its impacts on various segments of society. Internet Research Traditions pertain to the methods acquired and applied by scholars to study the Internet. But what do we exactly study when we study the Internet?
2.2.1 Categories of Internet Research
Recall your Internet usage since this morning. How many apps have you accessed, how many social media profiles have you checked? How much content have you consumed, be it checking the weather update, watching an episode of your favourite show, or searching for your favourite recipe? This brings us to the question - what do you exactly study when you study the Internet? Is it the content? Is it the user? Is it the traffic on a webpage? As a user, you do not have access to a lot of data, like the code and the traffic analytics of websites. The amount of accessible data is also vast. For example, social media platforms generate content in uncountable numbers and create billions of comments every day. So, how does one even start quantifying the units of study? Internet Researchers have explored varied topics to study, analyse, understand, and define. These range from qualitative aspects to quantitative as well. They can be broadly divided into the following categories:

1. Technology: The Internet is a technological innovation first and makes
Traditions use of technology furthermore in designing the websites, browsers, networks, applications and even infrastructure of the World Wide Web. Marshall McLuhan has famously said, "Medium is the message", and being technologically driven, innovations for the Internet are also tied with technological innovations. This is why the Internet of Things, Artificial Intelligence and Virtual Reality are currently emerging as hotcakes in Internet research. Thus, researchers studying technology can observe how it is evolving and affecting the structure and applicability of the Internet.
2. Usage: The applicability of the technology emerges as the second
research category. The Internet has found several ways to reach the public, from ICT (Information and Communication Technologies) to social media to e-commerce. In a networked society, the offline and online populations become the same, thus diversifying usage. On the other hand, unlike researchers of different mass media, Internet researchers acknowledge that the audience on the web is not just a consumer but a producer. Thus, the researchers examining the web usage would explore the user base and the content being hosted and consumed on the web. This can encompass qualitative and quantitative study methods as well.
3. Policy: As Internet penetration and its usage increase, it becomes
necessary to streamline and monitor it. Without central governance, Internet policies face difficulty in formulation and application. Policy research focuses on how technology governs human interaction and, in turn, affects national and international information infrastructures. The researchers of the Internet policy analyse the existing guidelines and framework regarding Internet usage, suggest future courses for policymakers, and conclude their research.
4. Impact: Overlapping with the field of psychology and sociology, the
researchers of this paradigm study the effects of Internet usage on individuals and groups. Whether through online education or e- commerce, apart from creating new virtual avenues for communication, the Internet also modifies human interaction in the offline world. Several disciplines associated with the study of humans have started acknowledging the Internet as a catalyst in human development and are probing into this further. Emerging as a multidisciplinary field, Internet Research broadly adheres to these four categories. The research methods and theoretical frameworks have also been derived from the disciplines. For a long time, the Internet was termed and treated as 'New' media, and thus, the dichotomy between old and new media existed for researchers. Today, the line has been erased as the Internet generates its own line of methods, theories, sampling techniques and theoretical frameworks.
2.2.2 Characteristics of the Web
While charting a journey to study the web, there is a need to distinguish the fundamental qualities that make it different from any other traditional 27

Digital Research communication media format. Following are a few characteristics of the web Methods that make studying it more challenging and unprecedented for Internet scholars: Intertextuality: While reading a book, you might have got stuck on a word naming a phenomenon. You would have wondered about it and then proceeded with the text with a mental note to check more about it later. Later, you might have even forgotten about it, but knowing it at the time you came across it would have also added to your reading. On the web, jumping to a subtopic and returning within a short time is easier. Think of having a dictionary or encyclopaedia on the side, open at the right page all the time. The text on the web is interconnected with the sub-topics it holds; it does not exist in isolation. Think of a tree branching out to meet other trees. Hyperlinks connect the topics with each other, sometimes leading to a section on the same page or sometimes to a different page altogether. These links allow the reader to jump to any definitions, explanations, and data verification and then return to the topic immediately. This enriches the reading and allows the reader to branch out as per their own interests. Nonlinearity: The traditional text layout is linear and has a specific beginning and end. Look at the example of this Unit; while you may choose to skip the beginning or start from the end, it has been designed to be read in the direction of beginning to the end. Compared to this, the text on the web is non-linear, and the reader can jump through the hypertexts, as discussed earlier. The function of nonlinearity allows the reader to go as deep into the text as they want, thus making the reading process highly subjective. The reader may also choose to continue reading the text further from different sources for as long as possible. In this case, the text becomes endless and depthless. This feature implies that each reader on the web will derive a different meaning from the same text. Prosumerism: Traditionally speaking, the reader has remained at the receiving end of the content, rendering them passive. Look at this Unit again; the writer wrote it sometime back, and you are reading it today. We may not have any other communication apart from this text. You do not have a way to reach out to me to share your feedback or ask any questions. Some methods may have feedback options, like classroom teaching, writing a letter or a telephonic conversation. Feedback from the audience is also a relatively new concept in communication studies. In the case of the web, the reader can get in touch with the writer, edit the existing text or even create their own text. He or she may also dissect it and disagree with it. You might have seen fan-made trailers of films or have read fan fiction. Wikipedia is editable, and the readers can alter the text. This feature of the web not only raises questions about the responsibility of the reader but also about the text's credibility. On the other hand, prosumerism also helps establish the Internet as a medium, breaking away from the hegemony of mainstream media by challenging the traditional producer- consumer hierarchy and establishing the Internet as an alternate medium.

These are a few of the features of the Internet that affect how scholars study Traditions it.
2.2.3 Issues and Concerns
Like any other field of study, the Internet has issues and concerns about research. Let us discuss a few of them in detail:
1. Digital Divide: While increasing daily, Internet access is still not
available to all populations in the world. Many researchers, specifically in third-world countries, struggle with limited Internet access. Their research also does not garner as much exposure, thus tying the fulcrum in favour of the Western lens and literature in research. This disparity further causes an imbalance and bias in data, affecting the research conclusions.
2. Sampling: Content worth more than 320 Million TB of data is generated
daily on the Internet. Vast swathes of the population are active on the web daily, in varying degrees and for multiple purposes. With a vast universe of research, sampling can be problematic for researchers. Identifying not only a representative number but also a sample representative of the vast body is a task in itself.
3. Reliability and validity: In offline research, data reliability and validity
can be assessed using multiple tools. But on the web, one does not have a fool proof method to verify whether they are interacting with a bot or a human being across any platform. Similarly, concerns with individuals' identities and the validity of data obtained are major issues for Internet researchers.
4. The impermanence of the text: As readers can also alter the text to
innumerable iterations, studying the text becomes difficult, if not obsolete. The text on the web can be edited and, at times, completely removed. The data on the web is dynamic, so the same test can yield different results every time it is run.
5. Security concerns: Internet researchers must also tackle cyber threats
and other cyber security issues, such as hacking, phishing, etc. while conducting the research. If mishandled, the data gathered for the study can be accessed without authority and pose severe threats to all parties involved.
6. Ethical concerns: The researchers also struggle to distinguish between
personal and public online. Accessing and using data for research can breach an individual's privacy, while informed consent can be difficult to obtain from a large sample. One may also get entrapped in legal issues if one is not careful about copyright laws and intellectual property rights.

Methods Activity: 1 Chart the Internet usage of your family members. What purpose do they use the Internet for? How long are they exposed to it? What devices do they use to log into the Internet? Do you see any patterns in your records based on age, gender, or employment? Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How are Internet research topics categorised?

2. What are a few ethical concerns related to Internet Research?

2.3 PHASES OF INTERNET RESEARCH
Although predated by the actual Internet itself, Internet research began when researchers started exploring or discovering it. The field, now well established, can be divided into broad chronological phases. The phases rolled out with the development of the Internet, its increasing usage and resulting critical analysis by the researchers, which has helped tremendously in further development. This pattern highlights the circular relationship between the developer, the user, and the researcher. While academia has had the task of researching appropriate subjects at the needed time, the Internet has made access to research possible across the globe, thus accelerating it. As discussed earlier, the Internet has emerged as an object of study and a tool, archive, and publisher. But this has not happened overnight; it has taken decades and can be categorised now in hindsight. The four phases of Internet Research can be broadly categorised in the following manner:
2.3.1 Technical Issues with the Internet
As the Internet was in its infancy, the first phase of Internet research dealt with philosophical and technical issues. One school of thought that emerged analysed the Internet as a stand-alone invention and studied its phenomenon in isolation. This school believes the Internet will/is cutting off humans from society. In a highly dystopian approach, the researchers in this group thought that the Internet would cut off civilisations from each other. This group of researchers exists even to date.

Another significant perspective that emerged was looking at the Internet as a Traditions continuum with society, as with any other scientific invention and its application. The researchers of this group analysed the functions and services provided by the Internet and how they compared with other media and communication platforms. The researchers approached the Internet as a tool and looked for ways to sharpen it for better use. The extreme ideological perspective of this group believed that the Internet would create a super smooth network across the globe, connecting all citizens and empowering all sections of society. Still an invention, the majority of the research in this phase explored the scientific and technical issues emerging. Connectivity, speed, communication technologies, data archival, and access were the first popular subjects of research, focusing on the functionality of the World Wide Web. Due to its utility, a major focus was also laid on the economic repercussions of the Internet in the workplace or commercial sectors. This phase rolled into the second phase as the focus shifted to utility from mere function.
2.3.2 Uses and Users of the Internet
The next phase of Internet research explored various Internet applications and how users interacted with them. The academia had accepted and experimented with the Internet as the browsers had made it easy for the general user to access it, and websites became navigable for laymen. Marketing firms became the first organisations to study the consumer base of Internet platforms to suit their purpose. User perceptions and attitudes were surveyed with the help of questionnaires and explored with the help of interviews and focus group discussions held online and offline for triangulation. This phase also saw collaborations between social and computer scientists. Comparing the differences between the demographics of offline and online populations, these studies worked out the usage patterns and traffic on the web. This helped identify the socioeconomic strata on the web and thus quantify the penetration of the Internet. This phase also helped reduce the gap between the utopian and dystopian views adopted by the scholars in the first phase. While the world has become a global village, scholars have worked on the idea that equality and equity are still long-term targets.
2.3.3 Effects of the Internet
As the Internet progressed from a novel invention to a utility for the masses, the research focus also shifted from merely studying the Internet as a phenomenon to studying its impact. Its involvement in daily life had increased manifold, and the transformation of users from consumers to prosumers was initiated in this phase. Many interdisciplinary researchers had forayed into Internet research by this time, enriching it with theories, methods, and literature from their respective disciplines. The Internet's various psychological, sociological, economic, and political impacts were studied during this time. With social networking, online communities have started mushrooming. The online and offline personas

Digital Research were bifurcated and provided material to study for the researchers. Online Methods communities started formulating cultural practices, while psychographics tracking helped predict online behaviours. From political parties holding election campaigns online to e-commerce, entire countries and economies began running with the help of the Internet. This research phase is still on the rise in third-world economies as more and more disciplines are associated with the Internet. A more considerable discipline of Digital Humanities uses Internet penetration and other digital tools in the humanities paradigm.
2.3.4 Future Improvements
In the running phase, academia has moved forward from accepting, exploring, and studying the Internet. Researchers are now exploring ways to incorporate the Internet into their disciplines while suggesting ways to improve existing applications. Various concepts and models related to the Internet, directly or indirectly, are structured and defined. Newer technological developments such as augmented and virtual reality, machine learning, and artificial intelligence have paved the way for future research. As the world finally becomes a global village with comparable offline and online populations, cultural exchange and knowledge sharing globally becomes a thing of discussion. The research lens shifts to a critical analysis of the Internet and its applications, and the fulcrum shifts to refining its scope for better applications and usage. The future will tell what this phase of research summarises. Activity: 2 Consider the four phases of Internet research. Which one do you most relate to? Do you believe in the dystopian view or the utopian one? What phase of research do you relate to most? Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are the four phases of Internet Research?

2. What were the utopian and dystopian views in the initial Internet
Research?

2.4 INTERNET RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES
Traditions Due to the vastness of the subject, the researchers have devised and employed many methodologies for the study of the Internet. Few methods have been adapted from offline research methods already in practice, while few have been designed specifically for the web. Let us discuss a few of them in brief:
2.4.1 Online Surveys
Akin to the offline format, online surveys make use of a questionnaire distributed amongst the targeted sample to extract specific information. The questionnaires are created in the form of a digital form, which can be easily circulated using Internet-based communication tools such as mail, social networks, etc. The answers gathered through it can also be automatically coded in desired formats, saving labour on the part of the researcher. Targeting the sample online also makes it easier to reach people even in remote locations as well, saving the researcher the effort of travelling as well.
2.4.2 Online Interviews
Online interviews are conducted using digital tools in an online space. The interviewer and interviewee meet virtually via telephonic tools, text-based chat, or video calling. In theory, these interviews are like the offline counterparts only, but they have the opinion of being recorded. Moreover, these interviews are conducted without either of the parties moving outside their comfort zones.
2.4.3 Web Content Analysis
As discussed before, the content on the web ranges from text to images to graphics and even audio and video. This content is extracted, sampled, and studied extensively by researchers using this method. In the initial days of Internet research, the researchers used to code the content manually. With the advancement in research tools, automated programs today can extract and code the content for easier analysis.
2.4.4 Social Network Analysis
This methodology studies the relationships and interactions between individuals or groups within social networks. A sociogram is used to depict the connections between people, represented through nodes and the connections are depicted through routes. These diagrams help the researchers identify the information flow and study the community's anchor points. This further helps identify the opinion leaders in the group and checks how information can be filtered and disseminated.
2.4.5 Digital Ethnography
This studies online populations aggregating in an online group or platform. The virtual group usually starts cultivating its values and traditions, becoming a subject for observation and study. Like offline ethnography, the researchers join a community, observe their traditions and practices, and develop a 'thick description' of the group, albeit in the virtual space.

Digital Research 2.4.6 Data Analytics
Methods This method extracts data sets and employs algorithms and statistics to analyse them. The data could range from user profiles on a web page to traffic patterns. The analysis helps identify emerging patterns and generate insights within the data for practical applicability. The data sets are usually large, ranging in millions and billions, thus called 'Big Data'.
2.4.7 Online Experiments
Experiments are methods of research where a group of participants are studied before and after introducing a stimulus. They begin with a hypothesis, and the procedure helps prove or disprove the hypothesis. In an online format, the researcher changes the variables on a particular platform for a specific group, and the impact is studied to conclude. These are a few of the research methods employed to study the Internet. Researchers often combine these methods to approach complex problems, uncharted territories, and new research paradigms. The choice of method also depends upon the objective of the research, the target sample, and the availability of resources. Activity: 3 You may remember filling out an online consumer survey for a brand. What sort of questions do they ask? What do you think they do with the data? How do you think the brand benefits from this research? Would you be more comfortable if a representative came to your house to ask these questions?
2.5 THEORISING THE INTERNET
Internet Studies have not emerged as a school of thought, or an academic discipline structured under institutional boundaries. It has emerged organically as individuals across the globe started working on it simultaneously. This is why the research literature overlaps and is ambiguous, as many terms remain differently defined by scholars. For e.g., Online Ethnography is also known as Cyber Ethnography, Virtual Ethnography and even Netnography, all of which refer to the study of communities in an online sphere. Starting as a network to facilitate the military, the Internet became a research- worthy subject due to its expansion, penetration, and popularity. Email changed the landscape of human communication, catalysed further by social media platforms. The Internet of Things has further connected machines and humans, blurring the boundaries between man and data. AoIR, or Association of Internet Researchers, is one of its first kinds. It is an early association of researchers that was gathered with the help of a mailing list. Its first congregation is associated with the formal emergence of Internet Studies as a discipline, although the Internet predates it by decades. While some believe that Internet studies are an overlap of many fields and not a

field in itself, others believe that it has fragmented and differentiated itself, Traditions such as communication researchers differentiated themselves from sociology. Many scientific and peer-reviewed journals also started being published during the 2000s to facilitate Internet research in academia. As the psychographics of the users are mapped to feed into the algorithm and change the landscape of the Internet for each user, the fact remains that the Internet is customisable and thus appears different for everybody. It becomes even more difficult to universally document something that can be labelled as a 'shapeshifter' at best. Echo chambers not only exist for Internet users but also for researchers, for the Internet is not just a subject but a popular medium for conducting research. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are different methods of research on the Internet?

2. What is AoIR, and what is its importance?

2.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, you were introduced to the discipline of Internet research, starting from its origins to exploring various study topics under its aegis. We discussed various phases of Internet research and their different traditions. We further explored various methods of research that have been adapted for the Internet and discussed various issues and concerns that arise while studying it. Lastly, we identified factors influencing the Internet and those governed by it.
2.7 KEYWORDS
Avatar: Visual identifiers of the individual identity in the digital world. Based on the idea of changing shape and identity as in Hindu mythology. Chatbot: A pre-programmed software that can emulate a human conversation. Cyberculture: Practices and traditions developing in a community congregating on the Internet using digital tools.

Digital Research Emoticon: It is an icon which conveys a particular emotion. Used in text- Methods based chatting on digital platforms. Netiquette - A set of guidelines for online behaviour.
2.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Burnett, R. (2011). The handbook of Internet studies. M. Consalvo, & C.
Ess (Eds.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
2. Dawson, C. (2019). AZ of digital research methods. Routledge.
3. Graham, M., & Dutton, W. H. (Eds.). (2019). Society and the Internet:
How information and communication networks are changing our lives. Oxford University Press.
4. Hunsinger, J., Klastrup, L., & Allen, M. (Eds.). (2010). International
handbook of Internet research. Springer Science & Business Media.
5. Paulus, T. M., & Lester, J. N. (2021). Doing qualitative research in a
digital world. Sage Publications, Incorporated.
6. Ruppert, E., Law, J., & Savage, M. (2013). Reassembling social science
methods: The challenge of digital devices. Theory, culture & society, 30(4), 22-46. https://research.gold.ac.uk/id/eprint/7978/1/DigitalDevicesDistCopyJSep t2013.pdf
7. Snee, H., Hine, C., Morey, Y., Roberts, S., & Watson, H. (Eds.). (2016).
Digital methods for social science: An interdisciplinary guide to research innovation. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
8. Tsatsou, P. (2016). Internet studies: Past, present, and future directions.
Routledge.
2.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Internet research is broadly categorised into the following segments:
a. The technology used for the Internet b. Usage of Internet c. Policies for Internet d. Impact of Internet
2. Internet research has several ethical concerns. First, researchers struggle
to draw a line between personal and public on Internet platforms. Accessing and using data for research can breach an individual's privacy, while informed consent can be difficult to obtain from a large sample. One may also get entrapped in legal issues if one is not careful about copyright laws and intellectual property rights.

Check Your Progress: 2 Traditions
1. The four phases of Internet research are:
a. Technical Issues with Internet b. Uses and Users of Internet c. Effects of Internet d. Future Improvements
2. The ideological perspective of Internet research believed that the Internet
would connect a super smooth network across the globe and would empower all sections of society. On the contrary, the researchers with the dystopian approach believed that the Internet would cut off civilisations from each other. Check Your Progress: 3
1. There are many ways to research on the Internet. A few of the following
are Online Surveys, Online Interviews, Web Content Analysis, Social
Network Analysis, Digital Ethnography, Data Analytics, and Online
Experiments.
2. AoIR, or Association of Internet Researchers, is one of its first kinds. It
is an early association of researchers that was gathered with the help of a mailing list. Its first congregation is associated with the emergence of Internet Studies, although the Internet itself predates it by decades.

UNIT 3 DEFINING AND FORMULATING
Methods
RESEARCH PROBLEMS
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 Selecting the Research Problem
3.2.1 Difference between a Social Problem and a Research Problem
3.2.2 Importance of Review of Literature
3.2.3 Questions of relevance, feasibility and achievability
3.3 Formulating the Research Problem
3.3.1 Research Questions
3.3.2 Research Objectives
3.3.3 Research Hypotheses
3.4 Defining the Terms of Enquiry
3.4.1 Concepts
3.4.2 Constructs
3.4.3 Variables
3.4.4 Establishing Operational Definitions
3.5 Let Us Sum Up
3.6 Further Readings
3.7 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
In this Unit, we shall discuss the process of selecting and formulating a research problem. In this regard, surveying the available literature is the most crucial step, though peers, sponsoring agencies, and the researcher's own observation of the environment can also suggest a research problem. Once the broad area has been selected, it is then necessary to formulate the research problem in terms of specifics such as research questions, objectives and hypotheses. For this, reviewing existing literature in the concerned discipline becomes essential. The more specific and clear you are, the better, since well begun is half done. If you are clear about what you want to research, then how you will conduct your research is merely its logical extension. It is also important to understand the constituents of the terms of enquiry, i.e., concepts, constructs and variables. Their varying values in terms of occurrence, degree of intensity, nature of direction, etc., enable us to draw conclusions about the associations, correlations and causality that exist in human and social phenomena at any given point in time and space.

3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Formulating
Research Problems
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Differentiate between a social and a research problem; * Identify the factors that determine the selection of a research problem; * Discuss the importance of review of literature; * Define hypotheses and explain their various types; * Discuss concepts, constructs and variables; and * Explain the need for and importance of operational definitions in research.
3.2 SELECTING THE RESEARCH PROBLEM
This section will focus on the difference between a social problem and a research problem. We will also explain the importance of reviewing what has already been studied so that you do not end up 'rediscovering the wheel' unless you are interested in replicating previous studies to test or strengthen existing theories. We will finish this section by outlining various factors that go into making the final decision regarding the selection of the research problem.
3.2.1 Difference between a Social Problem and a Research
Problem Therefore, a social problem involves society and has a broader framework than a research problem. A research problem has a limited context, primarily involving academia or industry. Social problems also deal with various issues, including politics, culture, and religion, while research problems are often limited in scope and well-defined. A social problem has the element of public concern, while a research problem can exist at the level of curiosity alone, i.e. when a scientist does research just because s/he wants an answer to a question. It can also exist at the profit level, for example, when a manufacturer seeks to identify the optimum market for a new product. A social problem (riots, global warming, female foeticide, etc.) exists irrespective of the researcher. The researcher, on the other hand, formulates a research problem. For instance, the researcher could be interested in the role of media in covering communal riots or awareness of female foeticide. A social problem deals with mandatory (e.g., the legal age of marriage is 18 years) or normative propositions (e.g., literacy should serve as the foundation of a nation) propositions. A research problem deals with propositions that can be proved or disproved through empirical determination. For example, early marriage leads to health problems, or literacy leads to social awareness. The validity of both these statements can be tested through research. A social problem is a trigger or a launch pad for formulating research problems. Research findings, on the other hand, provide descriptions, explanations, predictions and solutions to social problems. For instance,

Digital Research research could establish that motherhood at a tender age is associated with Methods the death of the mother during childbirth or a higher risk of infant mortality. Therefore, we can say that the findings of research studies enable the framing of mandatory propositions, laws, and policies. A social problem is a one-time problem. It finishes once it is tackled or until it emerges again. The researcher formulates a research problem that can be repeated per his/her requirement. In this regard, experimental research studies set up in laboratories are a case in point. A social problem disrupts the smooth running of the social order, while a research study causes no such disruption other than minor intrusions into the respondents' lives. A social problem can be dealt with using intuitive thinking, common sense, etc., while a research problem uses scientific thinking based on empirical logic and reason. Moreover, a social problem can suddenly arise, necessitating spur-of-the-moment decisions. On the other hand, a researcher systematically proceeds to identify, formulate and lay down a procedure to study a research problem, and only then does the researcher start data collection and analysis.
3.2.2 Importance of Review of Literature
Certain relevant factors must be considered after identifying the broad area of study and before finalising the research topic. This is where the literature review comes in. We have reviewed the existing literature on our chosen research topic to ensure it is relevant, feasible, and achievable within a particular time frame, budget, and infrastructure. Review of literature economises efforts and maximises profit. It gives you an idea of what research has already been done, by whom, where, when and how. As an extension, it also tells you which aspects have been largely ignored or which methodologies have not been used - in effect, it allows you to identify the research gaps in subject matter, theoretical perspectives, methodologies, etc. You can then decide to either replicate previous research and strengthen existing theory or take up new areas and thereby revise existing theory or formulate new explanations for existing phenomena. A review of the literature gives you an idea of the practical problems faced by previous researchers as well as takes up their suggestions for further research. A literature review also gives inputs regarding methodology and terms of inquiry and insight into defining the variables you intend to study in your research. Literature refers to all information in the printed or oral form available on your research interest topic. For a review of literature, one can consult: Indices--these contain alphabetically organised listings of research articles under subject, title and author headings as well as information regarding where the article can be sourced, e.g., the Social Sciences Citation Index, the Humanities Index, etc. Unit 6 deals extensively with this topic. Bibliographies are akin to indexes. Other than that, they concentrate more on periodical/journal literature. A bibliography can also be limited to books

published in a particular discipline during a specific period. Formulating
Research Problems
Compilations of Abstracts can also be consulted. These are typically arranged according to subject matter and author and contain summaries of specific published articles. In that sense, they are more beneficial since one can decide to consult the full study based on whether the abstract is relevant to one's study, e.g., Dissertations, Abstracts, International. Journals and Periodicals are other sources of literature. They are publications of a fixed periodicity and discipline that contain full papers, articles, reviews, etc. Books and Encyclopaedi are also consulted for an exhaustive analysis and overview of one's interest area. An encyclopaedia can be particularly useful for framing operational definitions. General and professional/trade publications are other sources. Articles for laymen appearing in newspapers and magazines can provide interesting perspectives on complex problems in Communication and media for researchers to pursue. Many trade publications are published in films, advertising, public relations, etc., which can provide case studies in respective areas. The Internet is an immense source of information. The only drawback is that one must be careful regarding the credibility of the information source online. It is advisable to refer to the websites of recognised journals and research institutions.
3.2.3 Questions of relevance, feasibility and achievability
A good research topic can be related to a theoretical frame of reference. For instance, if you are interested in doing research in advertising, you can refer to the Uses and Gratifications theory, Diffusion of Innovations theory, etc. or any other theory discussed in detail in the Course on Communication and Media Studies. This will root your research in an existing body of theory and make it easier to identify potentially fruitful questions. This theoretical base will also enable your research to find its niche in the existing knowledge since your findings will either support or help revise the existing theory. Even if you are researching a completely new area, you can still consult theories from related disciplines and develop a better understanding of your subject. For instance, if you are researching social media addiction, you can always draw upon theories from psychology and link them to the study of a mass medium. A review of the literature of existing research studies helps to determine how relevant your research would be concerning the existing knowledge - will it fill a gap, or will it strengthen it - in other words, is your chosen research problem significant? One also needs to determine the feasibility of the topic before starting work on it. A topic might prove unsuitable for investigation simply because the question being asked cannot be answered with the facilities and information currently available. For instance, there is no point in taking up a topic that requires classified information for analysis or any other information that cannot be legally obtained. You may not have the necessary budget or infrastructure to use the technology needed to investigate the problem. Often,

Digital Research the essential technology may not even exist. For instance, we only now have Methods technologies like brain mapping to determine how individuals react to message stimuli. Moreover, a topic does not lend itself to productive research if it requires data collection that cannot be observed or measured with validity or reliability. If controlling for error is essential for you, then such a topic may not be feasible. Having an obvious idea of one's capabilities is equally important. If one is not a team member, it would not be feasible to discuss a topic requiring large-scale collaboration. Similarly, taking up a qualitative study is better if one is uncomfortable with numbers or statistical analysis. Before finalising one's research topic, one also needs to address the question of achievability. You might be engaging in research to fulfil the requirements of a degree, such as a dissertation. Naturally, you will be working on a deadline if you have a research grant or a fellowship for a specific period. Therefore, ensuring that your research topic is not too broad and unwieldy is essential. One tip is to write down your proposed title and then attempt to dissect the topic into small questions. For instance, Computer- mediated Communication as a tool for social relations - this working title will immediately ensure that you draw up boundaries and concentrate on this aspect to arrive at closure within a specified time period. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List two differences between a Social problem and a Research problem.

2. List the sources of information for conducting a review of the literature.

3. How can you determine the relevance of your topic?

3.3 FORMULATING THE RESEARCH
PROBLEM
In this section, we will focus on formulating the enquiry terms for your research. These primarily constitute research questions, objectives and hypotheses. All three don't need to be included in every research study. For instance, you may just have some research questions and objectives when

conducting exploratory research. You may have research objectives and Formulating hypotheses in more structured studies that address association, correlation Research Problems and causality issues. A study does not necessarily become weaker in the absence of hypotheses. The importance of formulating the terms of enquiry lies in the fact that it narrows down the research problem to a manageable specificity, lays down the extent and limits, and identifies the relationships proposed to be significant - in short, all that you hope to achieve through your study. The critical thing to remember is that there is coordination when formulating the enquiry terms. For instance, if your research question is 'whether demographic variables impact Internet usage', then the corresponding objective should be to collect data about the demographics of the Internet user and his/her Internet usage patterns. Only when you have this data can you answer your research question. How the question is answered will prove or disprove your research hypothesis that perhaps could be that 'socioeconomic status and frequency of Internet use is positively co- related'.
3.3.1 Research Questions
Research questions are usually asked in exploratory research when not enough is known about the research area to justify framing categorical hypotheses at the outset. Since the researcher is working in an area that has only been studied marginally or not at all, s/he may be unsure of the existence of the determining factors or the interrelationships. At this point, research is a knowledge-gathering exercise rather than verification. So, s/he asks a series of questions, gets many answers, and looks for patterns, and it is only at the end of research that s/he may be able to frame hypotheses to be taken up later in a more structured study.
3.3.2 Research Objectives
When a researcher is working in an area for which extensive literature is already available, it acts as a facilitating mechanism for him/her to frame the research objectives straightaway, followed by research hypotheses. The latter is like an answer- a tentative proposition whose validity remains to be tested. For instance, s/he can directly list a hypothesis - 'media consumption and need gratification is positively correlated' - without first framing it as a question. While framing the objectives, you must remember that they should be exhaustive and logically sequenced. For instance, an objective to determine media usage patterns should be listed before an objective to study the reasons for those patterns. Also, only those objectives that are empirically achievable must be listed, i.e., amenable to being observed or measured.
3.3.3 Research Hypotheses
As mentioned earlier, a hypothesis is a tentative generalisation, the validity of which remains to be tested. Hypotheses enable testing existing theories, suggesting new ones, and helping describe social phenomena with a certain degree of certainty. For instance, a hypothesis such as 'the more the exposure to televised violence, the stronger the belief in a violent world' enables you to test George Gerbner's Cultivation theory. Similarly, if proven, a hypothesis

Digital Research such as 'communication breakdown between couples is the primary factor for Methods divorce' enables you to describe the reasons behind divorce rates in the country. The importance of hypotheses in a research study lies in their ability to bring direction, specificity and focus. They help us control the intervening variables and enable decision-making and policy formulation. Hypotheses can be classified based on various criteria: source, level of abstraction, composition, and functionality. Based on source: a. The researcher can frame a hypothesis based on his/her perception or intuition regarding a particular phenomenon. For instance, a researcher may belong to a family where the men only discuss issues regarding their work or business while the women only discuss domestic issues. The researcher here draws upon one's personal experiences and hypothesises that 'conversational engagement is associated with identity perception'. These kinds of hypotheses make an important contribution to the theory and are useful in exploratory research since they bring forth interesting questions. b. The researcher can frame a hypothesis based on existing theory. The genesis here lies not in his/her intuition but in the findings of specific research conducted to study a particular phenomenon. For instance, s/he can take up the want-get ratio formulated by Daniel Lerner and seek to replicate it. S/he, too, may find that this ratio regularly operates in underdeveloped countries while not so much in the developed world. S/he may also identify gaps in existing research and frame a hypothesis accordingly. For instance, one may find that loneliness has not been studied as a factor in media consumption, so s/he can frame a hypothesis such as ' social support and media consumption are associated'. Level of abstraction: a. Level of commonplace impression: These kinds of hypotheses are observations about some empirical uniformity with respect to the phenomena under study. The focus here is on the descriptive; for instance, ' male reporters cover hardcore reporting. b. Level of conceptualisation: These hypotheses are based on existing theory where a hypothesis has been more or less proved but is open to falsifiability. For instance, the Two-step flow hypothesis is relatively well-established in understanding how information flow occurs in remote areas. Here, information is routed through the local opinion leaders like the sarpanch etc., rather than directly through the mass media. c. Level of specification: These hypotheses specify the nature of the relationship between the variables that constitute the hypothesis. A hypothesis may state that something tends to be accompanied by something else, i.e. it states the association between the variables - 'Education is associated with civic awareness. Specifying the degree and direction of the relationship can also state a hypothesis, e.g. 'Increase in leisure time leads to increase in media consumption. A hypothesis

regarding a causal relationship between variables can also be stated: Formulating 'Continuous exposure to computer screens causes dry eye syndrome'. Research Problems Based on composition/complexity: a. A simple hypothesis has only one or two variables. For instance, ' The Times of India is the most circulated newspaper in India', or 'Age and Internet usage are associated'. b. A complex hypothesis has more than two variables. For example, an increase in age and socioeconomic status leads to an increase in media consumption. These hypotheses are more difficult to test because the more variables in a single hypothesis, the more difficult it is to assess their interrelations--quantitatively and theoretically. Based on functionality/testability: a. A theoretical hypothesis is stated in terms of abstract concepts and is untestable in any direct sense. b. A research hypothesis is derived from the above but is stated so that it can be tested, i.e., it is a functional, testable, or working hypothesis. Most research methodologists recognise only two hypotheses under this category - Research hypothesis and Null hypothesis. The theoretical and statistical hypotheses are assumed to be understood as part of the research hypothesis. Here, the hypothesis regarding some operations to be performed, i.e., construct language, is stated. 'I.Q. levels and comprehensive abilities are positively correlated. To prove or disprove this hypothesis, the constructs of I.Q. and comprehension are measured with the help of test instruments. Any standardised I.Q. test can be used to determine the I.Q. To measure comprehension, we could construct a test instrument such as a reading passage followed by questions - the respondents' test score will rate their comprehension capability. c. A null hypothesis can be deemed the reverse of the research hypothesis or its negation. To take up the above example, the null hypothesis would be, 'I.Q. levels and comprehensive abilities are negatively correlated' or 'I.Q. levels and comprehensive abilities are independent of one another. It is the null hypothesis that is tested in research. This practice is followed by convention because testing the null hypothesis first makes the researcher declare his/her objectivity. Since the null hypothesis denies what the researcher holds to be true, according to its priority, s/he declares that s/he is giving all the alternatives the first chance to be proved. The concept of null hypothesis is based on the law of probability. The research hypothesis and the null hypothesis are alternative statements. Both have the probability of being true or false, so if one is proven, its alternative, by logic, is considered disproven (though it should be noted that neither the research hypothesis nor the null hypothesis can be true or false under any given test of it. That is why we say that the data failed to support the hypothesis or failed to reject the hypothesis). Moreover, it seems easier to prove something false than to prove it is true - one can

Digital Research say that there could be many reasons for a particular effect, but this one Methods is not the cause. d. A statistical hypothesis refers to the technical form in which the hypothesis is stated for purposes of a statistical test, i.e. it is indicated in a manner that makes it amenable to applying the relevant statistical tests of significance. The data is quantified, confidence levels are set, tests are applied, and values are obtained and checked to determine whether they fall in rejection or acceptance. It is important to note the difference between significance and importance in research methodology. The former is mathematical, while the latter is subjective, based on experience and judgment. A hypothesis may be rejected based on not clearing a statistical test or being set to specific parameters, but that does not mean it ceases to be important. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. When are research questions asked?

2. What is the importance of hypotheses?

3. Define a Null hypothesis.

3.4 DEFINING THE TERMS OF ENQUIRY
In this section, you will study how hypotheses are framed. The criterion of a good hypothesis is that it should be clear and concise regarding what is to be studied and how. In that sense, it should also be testable. Whether the hypothesis is merely descriptive or analytical, it will always have one or more variables to be observed or measured. In certain instances, this task is easy, while in other cases, procedures have to be put in place so that the observation or measurement can take place. Since we are dealing with human and social phenomena, we must also understand that the same phenomena can have multiple meanings depending upon the context of time, situation and person. Therefore, it becomes important to understand how variables should be defined for a specific research study to ensure that the findings are understood from the right perspective.

3.4.1 Concepts
Formulating
Research Problems
Concepts can be called observables, i.e., terms with direct empirical referents. A concept is formed by summarising related observations of either directly observable or easily measured characteristics. For instance, income is a concept that can be deduced through observations of a person's lifestyle or directly measured in terms of monthly/annual income. We can say that a concept is a term formed by generalisation from particulars. We can examine the properties of a particular book - size, weight, thickness, paper quality, print, subject matter, the ratio of visual content to verbal content, etc. and slot it in the genre of textbooks, reference books, fiction and so on.
3.4.2 Constructs
Constructs can be referred to as non-observables as they cannot be easily related to the phenomena they are intended to represent. They have no direct empirical referent, i.e. they are not directly part of our empirical world. For instance, anxiety, violence, faith, intelligence, social prestige, attitudes and so on. You cannot point to something and say this is faith. To observe or measure faith, you will have to frame specific parameters or indicators to do so, and depending upon how many of those parameters are met, you will be able to state the quantum of faith possessed by a particular person or group. Therefore, we can say that constructs can be defined as higher-level abstractions constructed from concepts at a lower level of abstraction. Researchers often construct their own indicators to concretise a relatively abstract phenomenon, or they combine concepts to explain a construct. In that sense, its exact meaning relates only to the context in which it is found. For instance, to measure social status, a researcher may combine the concepts of income, education, occupation, etc.
3.4.3 Variables
A variable is the empirical counterpart of a concept or construct. It is capable of taking on different values; thus, in effect, a variable is something that varies. Variables are important because they link the empirical world with the theoretical - they are the phenomena and events that can be measured or manipulated in research. A person's age varies in terms of years, income varies in terms of money earned, and intelligence varies in terms of scores achieved on an I.Q. test and so on. A researcher uses variables to measure how they affect other variables. They can also be manipulated to study the corresponding effect of this manipulation on other variables. Researchers try to test several associated variables to develop an underlying meaning or relationship among them. After suitable analysis, the most important variables are retained. These are marker variables and continue to be built upon as research continues in a particular area. Variables can be classified according to the manner of their usage. a. Independent variables are those that are systematically varied or manipulated by the researcher. Dependent variables are those systematically observed for concomitant variation due to the manipulation of the independent variable. For instance, to measure whether the camera angle influences the credibility that a viewer attaches

Digital Research to a news reader, a researcher may shoot the same news bulletin using Methods three different camera angles - top, low and eye level. S/he then shows this news bulletin to three groups and asks them to rate how credible the newsreader is. S/he may find that the group shown the news bulletin where the news reader is looking directly into the camera found the bulletin to be most credible. In this example, the camera angle is the independent variable, and the effect of its variation is measured on the dependent variable, i.e. credibility. Since this is an experimental study with active manipulation of the independent variable, this variable can also be referred to as the active variable, the manipulated variable or the experimental variable. The dependent variable here can also be referred to as the passive or measured variable. In non-experimental research where there is no active manipulation of variables, different terms can be used - the variable that is used for making predictions or is deemed to be the cause of something, e.g. if poverty is present, so will illiteracy, this variable can also be termed as the predictor or the antecedent variable. In contrast, the variable predicted to result or is assumed to be affected is called the criterion variable. b. When specifying relationships in a hypothesis, it is important to account for or control the extraneous or intervening variables. If this is not done, the findings may be erroneous or invalid. For instance, we may have hypothesised that education leads to modernity. We collect data regarding the two variables and prove or disprove the hypothesis accordingly. But it may so happen that even though education impacts whether a person develops a more modern outlook or not, no education will greatly change a person's outlook unless his/her family is also a progressive one. However, since we have not factored in the family background variable, we have erroneously held education responsible or not responsible for a modern outlook. In contrast, the causal variable had been the family background. Since many factors combine to create a particular effect in human and social phenomena, the researcher must either include all the variables or control them. For example, if the researcher feels that family background could be an intervening variable, s/he can control it by only including those respondents in the sample who come from similar backgrounds. Doing so will cancel its effect out of the equation since this variable will now be held constant. When such a thing is done, these variables are called 'control variables'. Intervening variables can also be understood as those without the intervention, for which the relationship between the independent and dependent variables cannot be established. Suppose you want to study the relationship between age and newspaper readership; you assume that older people read the newspapers more. However, without the intervening literacy variable, the relationship between the independent and the dependent variable will not be complete.

3.4.4 Establishing Operational Definitions
Formulating
Research Problems
It is very important to define the variables under study, as failure to do so impacts the reliability and validity of the study. Generally, any first attempt at a definition applies common sense and everyday life experience. For instance, the most conventional approach to defining age would be to define it in terms of years lived beginning from birth. However, as knowledge grows, concepts evolve, meanings change, and perspectives multiply, it becomes important to categorically state how one will study a particular concept for a specific study. For instance, one researcher may want to study violence purely on physical terms so s/he defines it accordingly. Another researcher wants to study it from the point of view of verbal violence, yet another wants to distinguish between animated and actual violence. Still, another wants to study it only from the perspective of the victim and so on. As complexities increase, so does the need to focus on specifics. When defining the variables under study, two approaches are followed - convention, i.e. framing a definition in terms of what is most commonly understood, or framing a definition in terms of the researcher's understanding or objectives. In the latter case, the researcher has to ensure that the definition remains within the bounds of logic and reason. Conventional definitions are usually constitutive, nominal, or formal, defining a word by substituting other words. These are traditionally the dictionary meanings. For instance, status is defined as a person's standing in society; anxiety is defined as nervousness, etc. The stipulated definitions are usually the operational definitions. An operational definition defines a concept in terms of the operations by which it will be represented in a particular study, i.e., it specifies the procedures to be followed when expressing or measuring a concept. In a way, operational definitions are quantifications of the nominal definitions. For instance, violence could be defined as any physical act that results in bodily injury to be measured in time units. Anxiety could be described in terms of the score obtained on a five-item scale or the basis of observation of the occurrence of specific physical actions such as restless gestures, perspiration, stuttering, etc. An operational definition provides an empirical reference to the variable under study. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is the basic difference between concepts and constructs?

Digital Research 2. Define a variable. Methods

3. What is an operational definition?

3.5 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed how to select a research problem. We started by differentiating between a social and a research problem. We then highlighted the importance of conducting a literature review, which helps identify and select the research problem. We also learned the importance of ensuring that our selected topic is relevant, feasible, and achievable. We further focused on formulating the terms of enquiry--research questions, objectives, and hypotheses. The various types of hypotheses were categorised. We also described how the hypothesis is framed using variables. The difference between concepts and constructs was highlighted, and the importance of framing clear operational definitions was emphasised. It is hoped that the above discussion will help you define and formulate your own research problem. In the next Unit, we shall move forward with the discussion and focus on sampling methods.
3.6 FURTHER READINGS
1. Kerlinger, F.N., (1973), Foundations in Behavioural Research, Holt,
Rhinehart and Winston. N.Y. Kumar, Ranjit (2008), Research
Methodology, Pearson Education. N.D.
2. Neuman, W.L., (2007), Social Research Methods- Qualitative and
Quantitative Approaches, Pearson Education. N.D.
3. Wimmer, R.D and Dominick, J.R (2010), Mass Media Research - An
Introduction, Thomson Wordsworth Publishers, London.
3.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. A social problem can suddenly arise while a research problem is

formulated. Secondly, a social problem has the element of public Formulating concern, while a research problem can exist at the level of curiosity Research Problems alone.
2. Consulting indices, bibliographies, abstracts, journals, periodicals,
books, encyclopedias, general interest publications, trade publications, and the Internet can help conduct a literature review.
3. The relevance of a research topic can be determined by ensuring that it
has a theoretical frame of reference as its foundation, thereby either strengthening existing theory or revising it. Its relevance also exists in its significance--it should fill research gaps in subject matter, make the methodology more precise, or have implications for policy formulation. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Research questions are usually asked in exploratory research when not
enough is known about the research area to justify framing categorical hypotheses at the outset.
2. Hypotheses enable us to test existing theories, suggest new ones, and
help us describe social phenomena with a certain degree of certainty. From the point of view of methodology, hypotheses ensure a more precise study; they impose boundaries, clarify concepts, and enable controlling for intervening variables and testing for statistical significance.
3. A null hypothesis is based on the law of probability and is deemed the
reverse of the research hypothesis or its negation. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The basic difference between concepts and constructs is that concepts
have a direct empirical referent, which constructs do not have.
2. A variable is a concept or construct that takes on different values; in
effect, it is something that varies.
3. An operational definition defines a concept in terms of the operations by
which it will be represented in a particular study. It specifies the procedures to be followed in expressing or measuring a concept.

UNIT 4 SOURCES OF DATA
Methods Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Primary and Secondary Data
4.3 Sources of Secondary Data
4.3.1 Internet search
4.3.2 Library search
4.4 Sources of Primary Data
4.5 How to Store and Save Your Data
4.6 Online Data
4.7 Let Us Sum Up
4.8 Further Readings
4.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
Media research is increasingly important as information is integral to our daily lives. All organisations, especially those in the media, need data. Data, which are then converted into information and knowledge, goes toward enhancing a given topic and helps in decision-making. Data can consist of background information about a celebrity; data can also consist of voting patterns in a previous election. However, not everything published, online or offline, can be relied upon as 'data'. In understanding data for research, it is important to distinguish data by the source from which it is derived and how it is gathered. The most essential component of any research, including mass communications, must be conducted according to sound principles; otherwise, it will not yield accurate results and will be a mere waste of time, effort, and resources. Such research must use effective data collection sources to ensure the study is based on accurate and valid information. As you may be aware, the term' data' is plural. 'Datum' is the term used for a single piece of data. Our focus is on data. Data collection is the process where information is gathered and measured on variables of interest. It is important at all stages of a research process. Good data is needed to develop research questions and hypotheses and their subsequent tests.
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Describe various primary sources of data collection; * Discuss the secondary sources of data collection;

* Explain how to access and use various online databases; * Trace the connection between different forms of research and data collection, and * Store and save your data.
4.2 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY DATA
As you know, research is based on data, not opinions and hunches. Therefore, the data collection process must be accurate and appropriate. Sometimes, the approach to a research problem can depend on the collected preliminary information. What data we collect and how we collect are critical so that we can undertake the following activities: * frame the research question in a suitable way * collect relevant data * avoid having data gaps * save valuable time and resources * make accurate, reliable, and sound analyses * help future researchers navigate the data available * guide future researchers in further investigating a topic. As discussed in the previous units, the Sources of Data can be of two types - Primary and Secondary. Let us understand them in greater detail. Data are collected fresh and/or for the first time. For example, although data may already exist in government databases, one may still want to go to a village and collect fresh information on the number of disabled persons and the types of disability they have. What is then collected is primary data, original in character. During a census every ten years, the government collects primary data, and every few years, the government conducts the National Family Health Surveys. Such data collected from the field is primary and analysed before being presented to us in reports. When we read the reports, we look at secondary rather than primary data. There are several methods of collecting primary data. We may collect the data through surveys, observations, discussions, and interviews with experts and respondents in our selected research area. We may also collect primary data through photographs, audio, and video recordings in the field. The key characteristic of primary data is that it is originally collected. Therefore, primary data are: * Collected at the time when an event has occurred. * Data are in original form and have not been published anywhere else; they have not been interpreted or translated. * Data thus collected helps to create original documents because the origin is the research conducted in the field.

Digital Research Secondary data, on the other hand, are data that are already available and Methods have been collected and analysed by someone else. Such data may have already been analysed through statistical procedures, such as census reports and national readership surveys. In these cases, an agency has collected data from the field, tabulated and analysed it and presented it in tables, charts, and reports for others to use. For example, we may refer to the findings of a national readership survey by saying, "According to data reported in the latest National Readership Survey, 2018" while reporting findings. Secondary data are also available and collected from several sources, such as publications of central and state governments, annual reports, technical and trade journals, books, and research reports. Some such data may have been published in journals, while others may have been unpublished reports. The key factors to remember about secondary data are: * Secondary data are not original. * Secondary data have already been analysed, so using secondary data means examining already examined data and conclusions. * Secondary data may have been taken from a source but repackaged for objectives that may differ from our research. * Secondary data may have been analysed differently. * Secondary data is a cost-effective method of data collection, but such data must be reliable, valid, and accurate. For example, Wikipedia is not a reliable secondary data source for academic research. There are some advantages of using secondary data in research. The use of secondary data is cheaper, timesaving, and is a quick way of gaining an understanding of the subject at hand. Sometimes, reanalysis of secondary data may yield different results from the original. However, there are also limitations to secondary data. Because such data come from already published reports, information may be outdated. For instance, much of the data in the Census Report 2011 is dated because the report gives information about the situation in 2011/2012 but cannot be counted upon to be accurate in 2018. This is also the case with many field- based reports because there is always a time lag between the collection of primary data, the analysis, and the publication of a report in respected journals. Sometimes, this time lag can even be three or four years long.
Requirements of Secondary Data
How does one then make the necessary choices about when, where, and how to use different data sources? We suggest some simple ways of deciding when to use secondary data, when to use primary data, and what yardsticks to use for evaluating secondary data. Most research in mass communication uses a combination of primary and secondary data. The extent to which a data source is used depends on the research undertaken. The first issue that comes to mind is what kind of research we are undertaking. Let us examine this regarding the research classifications presented in Unit 2.

There are four requirements for selecting secondary sources of data.
1. Availability: Secondary data must be available. For instance, to take the
example of the physically challenged persons cited earlier in this Unit, if details about the physically challenged in a village are not available in the Census or other documents, we would have no choice but to collect them afresh. We may also get several physically disabled persons, but we may not know specifically who they are in a family.
2. Relevance: The data must be relevant to the problem under study. Do
not use irrelevant data sources.
3. Accuracy: Secondary data must be accurate and reliable. There must be
clarity on how the data were collected, the methodology used, the margin of error, and whether the sources were dependable.
4. Sufficiency: There must be enough data available. If not, primary data
collection is a must. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Define Primary and Secondary Data.

2. What are the critical factors in choosing secondary data?

4.3 SOURCES OF SECONDARY DATA
Let us examine secondary and primary data sources in more detail, especially the processes followed in conducting research studies. Communication is an interdisciplinary subject; therefore, we often research topics not just about media but also about many other disciplines. This is why we must cast our nets wide in our search for secondary data and look at various sources for information. When we are about to embark on a research project or study, many things are unclear. At this stage, we are still looking at a broad area, and we do not know what research on the given topic is available, who has done research before, and where the information to be found will guide us in proceeding. What are the secondary data sources that you are likely to search for? Some of these are:

Digital Research * Library resources Methods * Previous research reports/ Project reports * Historical accounts * Books and materials * Official/non-official records * State and district gazetteers, Census documents, Statistical reports * Autobiographies, letters, diaries * Documentary films, Programme transcripts * Photographs, Maps * Newspapers, Magazines * Discussions with experts /People This is the first step; secondary data and secondary data sources are most important here.
4.3.1 Internet Search
In today's world, however, an Internet search is the first place to start. This is because most publications are now indexed online, and hard copies of the indexes may or may not be available in a library. Hard copies are published year-wise, while the online index allows you to search across several years in one place. Use a search engine like Google and use keywords to search for the topic under study. The search engine will throw up vast amounts of material, some usable, some not usable. For academic research, some Internet-based secondary sources in the social sciences include Google Scholar, the Social Science Citation Index, The Arts
and Humanities Citation Index, The Communication Initiative Network,
ERIC, JSTOR, Science Direct, and Inflibnet.
Google Scholar
When you search Google for a topic, the search engine will show you what articles are listed and emerge in Google Scholar. Google Scholar is a web search engine focusing on academic articles. With a single search, you can search across many sources: articles, theses, books, abstracts and court opinions from academic publishers, professional societies, online repositories, universities, and other websites. Google Scholar will then provide the link, telling you where the book or article exists. Sometimes, Google Books (where you can read the book or article) will give a link and show you how to access it. It is an excellent place to start your hunt for secondary sources. You will also find out if the full article is free of cost and on payment, who the copyright holder is, and how the article will be cited in the bibliographic citation format needed in academic publications.
Social Science Citation Index
The Social Science Citation Index (http://mjl.clarivate.com/cgi-bin
/Ernest/options.cgi? PC=SS) covers about 3,000 journals across 50 social 56 sciences disciplines. You can search the index by title, author, subject,

journal, or ISSN number, which is the international journal classification. You can view a list of all the journals included in the index and search for materials in both current and older journals. If you do not have any preliminary information, search by subject using keywords.
The Arts and Humanities Citation Index
The Arts and Humanities Citation Index (http://mjl.clarivate.com/scope/
scope_ahci) is similar to the Social Science Index and is available from the same online provider. This index covers more than 1700 arts and humanities journals, including indexing and abstracting. You can search by topic title or journal.
The Communication Initiative Network
The Communication Initiative Network (http://www.comminit.com/global/ content/overview-communication-initiative) is a network of more than 100,000 individuals and organisations working in communication and development. Search their database for research papers, case studies, and knowledge summaries on important topics. The initiative provides free access to a vast repository of materials on various aspects of communication and development.
ERIC (Education Resources Information Centre)
ERIC is an online digital library of education research and information sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education. (https://eric.ed.gov/) ERIC provides access to 1.5 million bibliographic records (citations, abstracts, and other pertinent data) of journal articles and other education-related materials, with hundreds of new records added weekly. The ERIC Collection, begun in 1966, contains records for various publication types, including journal articles, books, research syntheses, conference papers, technical reports, dissertations, policy papers, and other education-related materials. ERIC also has a connection to grey literature, i.e. materials produced by individuals and organisations outside the normal means of distribution, such as journals and published books.
JSTOR
JSTOR (https://about.jstor.org/mission-history/) is a digital library for scholars, researchers, and students which covers more than 2500 journals from 57 countries. JSTOR provides free and low-cost access to academics and scholars in developed countries through partnerships with philanthropic institutions. JSTOR has more than 10 million academic journal articles, 50000 books, and 2 million primary source documents in its digital collection. In 75 disciplines. After Google, this is a good place to begin the search for secondary data.
Science Direct
Science Direct (https://www.sciencedirect.com/) has a massive collection of Social Sciences and humanities journals and books highlighting historical context, current developments, theories, applications, trends and more. When you go to Science Direct, you may think there are no mass communication materials. However, you must understand that because mass communication is interdisciplinary, secondary data sources in other subjects, like Psychology, 57

Digital Research Education, etc., are also important. Also, suppose you are looking for Methods research on theme areas in development, such as health communication. In that case, a wealth of articles will be available through this digital repository of articles and journals. Currently, more than 250,000 articles in Science Direct are open access, made free to read, download and use, keeping in line with the author's licensing. Inflibnet Inflibnet, an Inter-University Centre of the University Grants Commission, is India's digital network of libraries and resources. It was set up to support academic research and learning through cooperative facilities among universities and other academic institutions. Inflibnet has many activities, including E-ShodhSindhu (https://www.inflibnet.ac.in/ess/about.php). ShodhSindu provides current and archival access to more than 15000 core and peer-reviewed journals and several bibliographic, citation and factual databases in different disciplines from many publishers and aggregators. Students and scholars can access these databases through member institutions, including centrally funded institutions, universities, and colleges. Through its e-resources, you can access journal articles, reports, and databases. Through its activity IndCat, Inflibnet also provides access to an online catalogue of holdings (books, journals, theses, and dissertations) in Indian University Libraries. This online catalogue is helpful for students and researchers as it informs you which library a particular book may be available. An interlibrary loan of materials is facilitated through Inflibnet. The sources for secondary data given above are largely free databases. However, on the Internet search, you may find many articles freely available in the public domain and those that are copyrighted and not accessible unless you make a payment. In developing countries like India, paying US$35 just to view an article can be very prohibitive. This is where access to a library becomes important.
4.3.2 Library search
Before the Internet age, the library was where a researcher would go to collect data. The library stores books, journals, indexes, reports, newspapers, magazines, and unpublished documents. Not only do libraries hold published materials, but many also hold collections of old manuscripts and scrolls in hard documents and within their microfilm, microfiche, and electronic resources sections. Libraries can also access electronic journals and books through interlibrary loan facilities. Unless you have a borrowing facility as a library member, most libraries, you will find, will allow you to read the books and journals there in the library itself. The first place to start in the library is the card catalogue. Many libraries have online searches and drawers full of alphabetically organised library cards. Search the card catalogue first by the topic of your study. This is because, at this stage, you may still be unaware of the names of scholars or titles of books on the topic under study. You can also search by author and/or title of the book. Books are arranged on shelves by the order in which they are numbered in the library catalogue. Usually, it is the Dewey Decimal

Classification (DDC) system or the Library of Congress (LCC) system, which a library follows. After your book search, proceed to the Reference section of the library. This is where reference materials are housed, such as Encyclopaedia, Yearbooks, and even the hard copies of the Citation Indexes mentioned in the earlier section. Once you find the journal article reference, go to the journals section of the library. This is where journals are kept; you may find the journal's issue there. Newspaper articles are usually kept in the library's microfilm or microfiche collection because it is difficult for a library to stock print copies. If you cannot find what you want, ask for help, and the librarian will tell you whether it is available in the library or at the NASSDOC library or can be obtained on an interlibrary loan from some other library. You may also like to explore the NASSDOC library of The Indian Council of Social Science Research. NASSDOC provides documentation and information support to researchers in the social sciences and contains a huge collection of documents. Scholars working in autonomous research organisations, universities, and government agencies can easily use this facility to obtain data.
Newspaper and Magazines
In media research studies, newspapers and magazines can be important in collecting secondary data. With the development of the Internet, e-papers are also getting popular. Thus, getting information on any topic is very easy. There are opinions, columns, news stories, editorials, features, reports, and essays that can be referred to for research. However, it is advisable to use newspapers and magazines carefully, only for some background information, and to get a time reference for an event. Newspapers and magazines are not recognised as valid sources for academic research. Equally, articles in some open-access journals (not peer-reviewed), Wikipedia sources, and individual blogs are not recognised as valid sources for academic research. Much of the secondary data sources are consulted at the formative stage of a research project, much before the researcher goes to the field. Secondary research sources form the heart of the Review of Literature discussed in Unit
5. The literature review forms the basis for developing research questions and
hypotheses, which later link the current research to a body of theory on the subject. Identifying, sifting the useful from the irrelevant, and finding knowledge gaps that need to be filled requires understanding how to find secondary data and how to use it. And finally, because our secondary data sources must be reliable, we must know how to identify reliable secondary data. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Name a few freely available Internet sources for secondary data.

Methods

2. What is JSTOR?

3. Name two salient features of lnflibnet useful for Indian academics and
researchers.

4.4 SOURCES OF PRIMARY DATA
Primary Data are original research data collected by an organisation or an individual, i.e., first-hand data. It is often assumed that, since the data are collected by the researcher him/herself, such data are more reliable. This is not necessarily so unless rigorous and systematic steps are taken while collecting data. How to collect accurate, unbiased, reliable, and relevant primary data is discussed in various units of this course. At this stage, we will simply discuss the multiple ways in which primary data can be collected. Collecting primary data is often time-consuming and more costly to carry out. Primary data are also referred to as raw data. However, once such raw data are cleaned and processed by one team of researchers, they become secondary data for another group. What are the characteristics of primary data? * Data is collected in its original form. * Such data have not been analysed or published anywhere else. They may be fresh data collected in the field, relevant only to a specific date, e.g., exit survey data during elections. * Such data are always specific to the researcher's needs. What are the sources of primary data? There are many kinds of primary data. These include original letters, historical documents, photographs, audio and video recordings, archives, surveys, and observations, which can also be original data. We will discuss different kinds of primary data in mass communication regarding the different objectives of a given research effort. Suppose your research aims to understand the role of the press in the Independence struggle in India. In that case, you will look for books and

articles about the topic. This is historical research. You may also go to the original newspapers' pages and original audio recordings. For example, in pioneering research on the role of Gandhi and Mao as communicators, Dr Kusum J. Singh (1980) used the originally recorded messages of Gandhi and Mao during the period 1942-1944. She listened to the recordings, transcribed them, and analysed them. For her research, these original recordings were primary data. You may study the original discussions of the Constituent Assembly to see what was discussed when India's fundamental right to speech was included in the Constitution. You may also study parliamentary proceedings to understand what was discussed in the Parliament. You may study the diaries, personal letters, photographs, and other communications by leaders and historical figures. In all cases, you will use original materials. They include letters, life histories, memoirs, diaries, biographies, autobiographies, etc. These helps get information from the person himself and thus are reliable enough to be considered primary data. If you are doing legal research, you will study case files, legal decisions and previous case histories and decisions. These documents give information regarding events in the past and are written by an individual to narrate incidents in his/her life. Suppose your research aims to analyse the gender-based communication patterns in a village, especially the access and use of the Internet. However, you have little readily available data to base your hypothesis. In this case, you would carry out exploratory research in the village, using various primary data tools to collect primary data. We will quickly look at various primary data collection methods without going into detail because these are discussed in subsequent units. Survey As a first step, you may carry out a household door-to-door Survey to determine your sampling frame accurately. This survey would give you information about each household's members, gender, age, educational level, etc. Such information will help you select your sample. As such, this would be an exploratory survey. However, if the household survey does not yield enough information to enable you to make your research design, you may consider other methods such as observation or case study. Observation A study on gender-based Internet access and usage cannot be complete until you understand a) if Internet Access is available in the village and b) where WiFi hotspots are geographically located. For this, you would need another tool - Observation. You would have to walk around the village, see and locate the WiFi hotspots, cell phone towers, and routers. You may take some photographs and recordings. You may participate in the village activities to understand the dynamics. You would then use participant observation, which is also part of ethnographic research. You would record your observations of the participation in a diary or journal. The diary or journal notes become part of the primary data. These

Digital Research tools are part of Observation, which, in turn, is part of ethnographic research Methods discussed at length in Unit 12 of this course. Interviews You may also go to locations where you see men and women gather and talk to them about Internet Access to gain some insights. You are conducting Interviews with individuals or women in groups by talking to them. Collecting data through Interviews is discussed in detail in Unit 10. Experiments A significant amount of primary data can be collected through experiments. As discussed in Unit 9, experimentation is gathering data by selecting matched groups of people, giving them different treatments or scenarios, controlling related factors in their environments, and checking for differences in their responses. By collecting all this preliminary information in an exploration, you are collecting primary data, which will help you frame your research questions, hypotheses, sample sizes and samples. Primary data are not only collected at a preliminary stage. Primary data will also be collected during the fieldwork part of your research. All the data collected initially as part of your fieldwork are primary data, which will be tabulated, analysed, and reported as part of the research findings. Both kinds of data, secondary and primary, are extremely important and necessary for research. Without secondary data, one cannot begin to sharpen the research focus, define a problem in addressable terms, frame questions and hypotheses, know what information must be collected and what is not needed, and make reliable judgments. When primary data are collected and analysed, findings must be presented regarding prior research and evidence collected from secondary sources. Without such a connection, the continuity of the research tradition is affected. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List three sources of primary data.

2. Are original interviews primary data?

3. I went to a village and saw that men gathered in a tea shop while women
gathered at the temple. What kind of data have I collected?

4.5 HOW TO STORE AND SAVE YOUR DATA
At this stage, it is important to know how to store and save your secondary and primary data so that you do not have problems when a) citing sources, b) doing your research, and c) writing your report. All secondary and primary data must be stored for at least one year after completion of the research. These data will include your surveys and questionnaires, diaries, interview notes, field notes, observation notes, photographs, audio and video tapes, and anything else you may have collected as part of the research. There are simple reasons for this. First, you might want to consult a source again. Second, you might need to include a bibliography at the end of the research. Third, you need to get the citation correct. Fourth, you may want to write another article or research paper on a different aspect of the project for which the same data can be repackaged. Finally, the examiner may want information about your source if you are writing your thesis. You should have it readily available for scrutiny when questioned. You may also have to add more data to strengthen your study when asked to do so by the examiner or the agency paying for the research. If you do not take these steps initially, you may land in a nightmare later when writing the report, presenting it, or defending it at a viva voce. In secondary sources, all Internet-based sources provide details on how the book or article should be cited in a publication. Follow the rules and methods used in the American Psychological Association (APA) style sheet (https://www.apastyle.org/) to reference a book, a journal article, and/or a web page. Save those details in a folder or file with each citation on your computer or library cards. All books and reports also provide full details on titles, authors, publishers, and publication dates. This information is usually provided on the inside cover page. Note that information again in a folder or file so you can access it readily.
4.6 ONLINE DATA
In this section, you will learn about the nature and application of Digital Media Research Methods (henceforth DMRMs). This understanding of DMRM (also called new media research methods) will help you understand the concept of new methods developed due to the advent of new communication technologies. The information delivered through digital media platforms needs a different set of research approaches, some entirely new methods, and, in a few cases, old and conventional research methods that have been tweaked and adapted to the new digital media environment.

Digital Research Digital methods have previously been described as 'approaches to the web as Methods a data set' (Hutchinson). You will learn the concept of big data and methods to spot the relevant digital data while simultaneously applying the DMRMs principles. This would help you to have insight into the data from various publicly available datasets and your customised data in the form of webpages, scrapped information, RSS feeds, etc. DMRMs tend to alter the monotony associated with conventional research methods while ushering into a world of endless "fun-laden learning". You would learn the "computational aspect" of the data, which is widely applied in all disciplines like pure sciences, humanities and social sciences, arts, etc. For systematic and easy learning, this DMRMs chapter has been divided into data movement types, online places for data availability, benefits of open data and different data characteristics, which cover the whole gamut of topics. The Internet itself is a huge graveyard of information where the data, once uploaded, remains in the servers of services like "Internet archives" (www.archives.org), which aim to give free "universal access to all knowledge" with access to digitised materials on software, websites, databases, books, images etc. The archived data relating to news, online videos, discussions, debates, discussions, blogs, Facebook posts, Twitter, YouTube comments, etc., presents a big challenge and opportunity for the researchers. The modern world is data driven. The parameters of volume, velocity, format, type, and authentication characterise it. Data is regarded as the most sacrosanct component of any research study. Data (datum singular) is regarded as a scientifically recorded factual piece of information which can be appropriated for further analysis. This way, the content available in online newspapers, social media platforms, forums, government documents, etc., constitutes big data that can be harvested using relevant insights tools. According to Luo and McKinney, "research methods are defined as specific methods and techniques employed to collect and analyse data in a research study". Hence, any software, retrieval or analysing tools, data formats, techniques or commands, freeware, open databases, data format converters, websites, apps, scripts, browser extensions, etc., form the ecosystem of the DMRMs. In this part, you will acquaint yourself with the types of data and the format available for harvesting. The data online is either structured (excel format, CSV format or Txt format) or unstructured (mail, scanned documents, images, reports, videos, etc). Mostly, it is unstructured, and even if structured, it must be customised as per our research objectives and purposes. Two types of data movements are traversing the globe - free and open data (also democratising data). The former is free to use (with a few restrictions like non-commercial use, giving credit, etc.). In contrast, the latter is openly distributable for all purposes, such as remixing and onward distribution of the improved dataset. "Open data" is information accessible to everyone, machine-readable, offered online at zero cost and has no limits on reuse and redistribution (Tran & Scholtes, 2015). It is free from copyright, patents, licensing restrictions and other controls. However, terms and conditions may apply. Open data and online repositories gained popularity after 2009, after

the signing of an executive order for open government data by U.S. President Barack Obama. International Open Data Day by Open Data Enthusiasts is an annual event that "promotes awareness and use of open data". "It takes place globally, usually in February or March and typical activities include talks, demonstrations, seminars, hackathons, training or the announcement of open data releases or other milestones in open data" (Wikipedia)."International Open Data Day is a gathering of citizens in cities around the world to liberate data, create open map and write software applications to analyse, visualise and publish the results" (www.opennepal.net/odd2017/). Historically, the open data concept dates to the time of Enlightenment, when a few philosophers criticised the idea of state secrecy. However, the present open data movement has roots in the "open government" movement in Britain in 1800 and in the passage of the Freedom of Information Act in 1966, which allowed proactively the partial or full disclosure of the information held by the government. However, in the USA, the case for open data movement was strengthened with the Amendment to the Electronic Freedom of Information Act of 1996, which allows citizens to request information in electronic form in whatever format they require. A few of the world's open data initiatives have been mentioned below: www.data.gov.in. As regards the Indian scenario, this open data platform of the Indian government, under the Digital India Initiative, is of considerable value to the researchers, the world over in general and India in particular. It has high-value datasets on all important government organs, such as legislation, agriculture, transportation, etc. The datasets can be filtered before downloading by department/ministry, state and union territories, and sector type. In addition to the usual features, the site has ready-made visualisations generated for a few datasets. The additional link "open data site" on the website makes it further useful by mentioning authentic databases of governments around the world. Any user can also recommend a particular dataset to the site. www.data.gov--This is the initiative of the U.S. government's extensive data on climate, agriculture, consumers, ecosystem, energy, finance, health, local government, manufacturing, maritime, public safety, and science and research. It has 1.93 lacs (and growing) structured datasets that are freely

Digital Research downloadable. Methods https://www.archives.gov/open/available-datasets.html--This website hosts dataset links for all U.S. government information, such as Presidential speeches, proposed amendments to the Constitution, trade agreements, government manuals, etc. www.data.gov.uk - The U.K. government's open data is available on transport, health, crime and justice, education, society, environment, etc. The data is filterable according to the criterion of relevance of search, most viewed, frequently downloaded, time frame, etc. It has site analytics too. www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/in.html - This is the world's fact book maintained by the Central Intelligence Agency of the USA, which has detailed information regarding geography, people, transportation, communication, energy, government, territorial disputes, etc., for every country. www.github.com/planetopendata/awesome-world--This website is the biggest source of open data generated by users and contributors. GitHub is the world's largest platform for sharing the source code of various open- source programs. www.data.worldbank.org-The World Bank's open access to development data is the most comprehensive and exhaustive for various indicators. This provides datasets on government performances on various development indicators and miniature data on a particular country's performance on various indicators. This list of data topics is far more extensive and very useful. www.data.oecd.org - The database of (the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) is another user-friendly free resource equipped with online statistical analysis functions and visualisation. The data can be filtered for various parameters before downloading. www.familysearch.org/wiki/en/Digital_Historical_Newspapers-- Newspapers record any country's significant and historically important aspects; hence, the archive serves the idea of "memory freeze". The above website is a good repository for digitally scanned print newspaper enthusiasts, where all the historic newspapers of the world (sorted continent- wise) are freely available. www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:List_of_online_newspaper_archives- It has a list of online newspaper archives of newspapers from different countries, and the links are hosted here for the third-party websites. www.news.google.com/newspapers - This is the world's biggest collection of very old newspaper editions from all newspapers, sometimes dating back to
1830. This site scores many good points for content analysts who can search
the whole archive of all newspapers for their research query (e.g. economy, crime, finance, culture, etc.). The extremely old content is scanned, and the same is amenable to search. The scanned image cannot be saved, but a good freeware screenshot can serve the researcher's purpose here.

Another good example is Google News (www.news.google.com), which has a real-time and archived collection of world news. It covers virtually all news sources, such as news websites, T.V. channels, financial newspapers, news portals, etc. The trending news topics (e.g., Trump et al. elections, etc.) alongside the page ensure the grouping of all news items on a single topic in various international languages and regional ones, too. The user can search Google News with various filters. The search further retrieves data on specific dates, such as one-year, last day, last week, etc. Also, the data is further categorised according to its nature, e.g., article, blog, multimedia, editorial, all types, etc. The user can view the news by using a particular word and not by using any other word. Researchers can find the news from a selected source (BBC, CNN, etc.) and decide the news's location. The "exact phrase" search function allows the exact sequencing of more than one word in a search, e.g., the "demonisation story" query would be searched as such.

Methods This facility gives you the remarkable control over the data to be retrieved. The researcher can prioritise the search terms and topics (as shown in the figure) and adjust the news source. Another very useful feature is the RSS (Really et al.) feed function, where the researcher can generate his own RSS link by choosing the nature of the query (e.g. global warming, crime, etc.) and frequency of the news source. All these functions give the researcher a complete command over every word in the news world. All newspapers have their data live data as archived editions open to data retrieval (also known as data scraping). A few of them have the option of "advanced search" on their sites. The New York Times has had digital copies of all newspapers since 1851 at www.query.nytimes.com, and it allows searching as per the keyword (while showing the associated phrases related to the keyword as an instant result). This is similar to the case of other big newspapers like The Guardian (www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive). A few universities' websites and non- profit organisations have their newspaper data portal (single gateway to all the newspapers as per country, continent, globe, language.) to narrow focus their results. A British newspaper archive dating back to 1710 is at http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk, with 1.9 million pages and 757
titles. Similarly, The Times of India Historical Archive at
www.library.upenn.edu/news/799 has digitised newspapers from 1838 to 2001.

Regarding data accessibility, these online resources and their features save much time and energy for fledgling researchers. The RSS (Really Simple Syndication or Rich Site Summary) feeds, too, is an effortless method of accessing the updated news data. www.newsrack.in/extras/known-indian- feeds is a nice collection of all Indian newspapers' RSS feeds (on many topics in the same newspaper), which can be fed to an RSS reader, and desired content can be read. This data can be easily harvested using free online resources and imported into data analysis software. Similar web services exist for other forms of data (blogs, videos, podcasts, user comments, discussion forums, groups, etc.). Blogs are the centre of the universe for "citizen journalism". The latter may be regarded as the "fifth estate" after the "fourth estate" (Media). There is documented evidence of citizen journalists pulling down authoritarian governments (Arab Spring in Egypt), and the blog phenomenon is the oldest among all citizen journalism tools. The researcher who wishes to access the data on blogs exclusively can search it on www.blogsearchengine.org. Similar blog search engines exist for Blogger (www.searchblogspot.com, WordPress (www.en.search.wordpress.com), and Tumblr (www.tumblr.com/tagged/search-engine). These blog services provide APIs to researchers to provide data harvesting facilities. Retrieving the blog's content for research without APIs is a cumbersome task. Online apps can read and harvest the blog data for the researchers as per their objectives. Many useful visual data (videos) are uploaded to the biggest video-sharing website, www.youtube.com, a qualitative and quantitative resource for researchers. It is presumed that the next generation of learners (present too) would be "visual learners" predominantly. The videos and the underlying user's comments also serve a useful purpose. YouTube is a wide repository of visual and textual data. There are a few less explored functions in YouTube, like filters (to filter the videos as per date, type, duration, view count, rating, licenses, view quality, most liked videos etc.). There are various playlists (collections of videos) on a topic or company where multiple videos in a series can be watched). The built-in video analytics, too, can throw light on videos from Vimeo and Facebook and can be downloaded and imported into video analysis software. YouTube data (video comments) can be downloaded with the help of open-source software. This type of data harvesting facility has given rise to new paradigms of audience research, where the public (user) is seen participating and giving

Digital Research feedback on the media content. Such data can be imported into corpus Methods linguistics software to analyse various lexical patterns and discourse analysis. Visual communication research through still images has undergone a sea change with the advent of image collection algorithms employed by Google Images (www.images.google.com). The site doesn't have its own database of images. Rather, it retrieves photos from other websites and blogs in real time when searched. " A picture is worth a thousand words", though a cliche, can still make the job of visual researcher much easier to work: The site allows you to apply various filters before choosing your suitable image. You can select images according to size (small, big, larger and pixel defined by you), colour (colour, black & white, transparent, etc.), image type (face, photo, clipart, drawing, animated, etc.), time (time of picture upload) and, most importantly, the usage rights. The digital literacy paradigm expects the user's fair use of the referenced material. This contrasts with "digital skills", which measure the user's familiarity with the digital tools. Indiscriminate (improperly referenced, too) use of copied images, text, video, etc., may result in plagiarism, which is gross academic misconduct. A few websites (www.pixabay.com)offer free images and video downloads that are copyright-free, allowed for commercial use and without the requirement of attribution. www.pexels.com and www.imagesource.com are a few of them. The best choice is www.zipplist.co, which hosts links to the best free resources for photography, audio, icons, graphics, videos, textures, and colours. A search on Google may yield more useful and free websites. Flickr (www.flickr.com) is another great collection of photos on various topics, but a few usage restrictions may apply. The comments posted on the photos by the users pose yet another data mining opportunity. Regarding hugely crowdsourced data on social media like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn, etc., a big opportunity lies in these networks for brands' public sentiment, engagement, and reaching out to the next-gen audience. A separate chapter deals with social media analysis and data harvesting using sophisticated (yet free) tools. Readers' comments on online newspapers' news present a new challenge and opportunity for a researcher, who is working on a totally new kind of reader feedback mechanism. A few websites like NDTV (www.ndtv.com/trends/

most-commented) give ample opportunity to a researcher to gauge readers' reactions to the media's performance. Podcasts (audio files in MP3 format) of speeches, conversations, dialogues, scripts, etc., are relatively less valuable for media researchers unless transcribed first and subjected to qualitative data analysis. The data must be cleaned (Google et al. and other freeware) before being analysed. Various online tools are freely available to tweak the data as per your requirements. Google's Fusion Tables are a very nice tool that can create valuable new datasets by fusing more than one secondary dataset already available in the public domain. This way, the secondary datasets from different countries (the first column being the same) can be joined, and a whole new primary dataset can be generated quickly while sitting on the desktop. The data is by default in Excel or CSV format for the databases, but a few new formats have come up, e.g. Jason (for tweets & Facebook), txt (Text) format with UTF. Eight formats for corpus-enabled textual analysis. HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) format is well-known for the webpages. Similarly, PDF, JPEG, CSV, DAT, FLV, MP4, doc, PPT, etc., are the widely known common data formats which need to be converted into the desired formats (mostly Excel for categorical data and numerical data and in text format for textual analysis). API (Application Programming Interface) is the latest form of data extraction protocol in which the data is requested from websites (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, etc.) with API facilities for developers. The App requests the information from the user's behalf, and the API allows the continuous streaming of data in JASON format, which is converted into the desired format (excel or txt) by the App. Open data, according to a study at Harvard University, "enhances government's efficiency, fights govt's corruption, improves accountability" and leads to more transparency, openness, and participation, creating new journalism models by separating the signal from the noise and incubation of multi-billion-dollar businesses based on data of public sector (Kundra, 2012) citizen engagement and information based effective governance & public policy. While not limiting the benefits to the government sector alone, open data benefits all sectors across the board - teaching and research, manufacturing, NGOs, community workers, media, civil society, analytics industry, etc.
4.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed two types of data collection sources used in research-: Primary and Secondary. It was explained that data collected by others, analysed, and published in various books, journal articles, reports, etc., constitutes secondary data. Secondary data are very important for research since they help the researcher to set the tone of research, define objectives and questions more sharply, and, most importantly, set the contexts and boundaries within which a research study can be undertaken.

Digital Research Primary data are collected in the field at a preliminary stage to provide Methods accurate information on building a sampling frame or setting the field realities. They also form the heart of research because they are the data on which the findings and conclusions are based. The researcher's primary data becomes the secondary data for the subsequent or later researcher, guiding the latter in the way secondary data guides the study. We further examined how we can collect data from Internet sources that are available for everyone to use. We also explored the data sources available in India and how you can use the library effectively and efficiently without much loss of time and effort. You should explore all these sources when doing your research. Through the discussion, we emphasised the importance of data and data sources in communication research because failure to use proper data sources will affect your research's quality, reliability, and accuracy. Undertaking research is time- and effort-consuming, but there are ways to simplify it. This Unit explained these simple ways of sourcing data.
4.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Chawla, D. & Sondhi, N. (2011). Research Methodology: Concepts and
Cases. New Delhi: Vikas Publishing
2. Hamilton, J. (2005). Primary and Secondary Sources. ABDO Publishing.
3. Singh, K. J (1978). Gandhi and Mao as Communicators: A Comparative
Study of Practice and Theory. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Pennsylvania 1978
4.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Primary Data are collected fresh and for the first time. Secondary data
have already been collected, computed, analysed, and reported by another person or agency.
2. Availability, relevance, accuracy, and sufficiency are factors in choosing
secondary data. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Google Scholar, Social Sciences Citation Index, Arts and Humanities
Index.
2. JSTOR is a digital library for researchers and students, including over
2,500 journals from 57 countries.
3. Two important Inflibnet features that are useful for researchers are E-
ShodhSindhu and IndCat. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Surveys, observations, and interviews.
2. Yes, original interviews are primary data.
3. Primary data.

UNIT 5 ONLINE SAMPLING METHODS
Methods Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.2 Probability and Non-Probability Sampling
5.3 Probability sampling-based methods
5.4 Non-probability sampling-based methods
5.4.1 Characteristics of an Effective Online Survey
5.5 Online sampling for interviews and Focus Group Discussions
5.6 Sampling for Social Networks
5.7 Mixed-mode surveys using online and traditional media
5.7.1 Advantages of Online Data Collection
5.7.2 Issues and challenges in Internet-based survey sampling
5.8 Ethics of Online Research
5.9 Let Us Sum Up
5.10 Keywords
5.11 Further Readings
5.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
Online data collection is an emerging area in social science research. With the proliferation of the Internet and social media tools, researchers are finding it easy to collect data through the Internet. Facebook, Instagram, X (formally Twitter) and other social media tools have millions of users worldwide who can participate in online research. Online sampling refers to identifying and selecting a subset of respondents from a population with the help of web tools for research. Online Data collection methods have emerged as a standard media, communication, and market research tool. Also known as Internet or web- based research, researchers and statisticians use various online research techniques to gather data from respondents. Social media research is a relatively new addition to this range of online research techniques but is a significant development. This method presents more complexity, creating new opportunities for investigation. The sampling technique should be appropriate for that research purpose so that statistically relevant claims can be made. Online web surveys might be different from each other, i.e. they should be treated as equal. They can differ based on the following:
1. Sampling technique
2. Sample size

Digital Research 3. Types of questions Methods
4. Mode of implementation (Email, Forms, Social Media)
We can use both probability sampling and non-probability sampling to conduct online surveys. The data can be collected from the web through tools like Google Forms, Microsoft Forms, and emails. As in offline simple random sampling, we also need the sample frame. This chapter describes specific online sampling techniques that can be used in qualitative and quantitative research. The researcher must identify whether the survey data need to be generalized. If the findings are to be generalized, then the researcher must use a random sampling procedure through online methods. Non-probability procedures are helpful in qualitative studies since these studies require low sample sizes. However, these results can't be generalized over a larger population. For online probability sampling, the researcher needs a sampling frame.
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Know the main types of online sampling approaches in survey research; * Understand how online probability sampling and non-probability sampling differ; * Understand the sampling techniques used for interviews and focus group discussions; and * Understand the issues and challenges involved in online sampling.
5.2 PROBABILITY AND NON-PROBABILITY
SAMPLING
If the researcher decides to use quantitative and qualitative techniques, then the researcher needs a sampling frame. Random sampling can be done through the use of a sampling frame. Random sampling can also be done without the sampling frame, but statistically, it won't stand firm because the procedure will lack rigour. So, online sampling can be used for a web survey. This online sampling can either a) probability-based sampling or b) Non- probability-based sampling. In probability sampling, every population element has an equal chance of appearing in the sample. It uses a random procedure for selecting the elements from the population and generally uses a sampling frame. The sampling frame is a list of all elements that qualify to be the population for a study. Non-probability sampling, on the other hand, does not use a random procedure for selecting samples. Here, the sampling frame is not required, so it does not take a sample from the whole population. For example, if the population happens to be a university, then the sampling frame will have a list of all students studying in the university. In the case of a company or an organization, the sampling frame happens to be a list of all the employees. The researcher should try to include all the elements or respondents in the sampling frame. Having said this, the sampling frame is 74 never complete since some students may not be available, may be ill, or

maybe travelling. Inclusion criteria also determine the number of elements in Methods the sampling frame. Once the sampling frame is in place, the researcher can execute any probability sampling technique that suits the purpose of the research study. Some of the methods which the researcher may use are: a) Simple random sampling. b) Stratified random sampling c) Systematic sampling d) Cluster Sampling. The respondents are selected based on convenience or availability using a non-probability sampling technique. Different online non-probability sampling techniques might be used, such as offline techniques. Some of them are; a) Availability sampling b) Purposive sampling c) Quota sampling d) Snowball sampling. Steps in online sampling: The following steps are followed when selecting a sample from a population. a. Population Identification: The first step in online sampling is to identify a population of Internet users who can participate based on the research design. b. Identify the sample size for the research study. c. Use the right sampling technique: Various probability and non- probability methods can be used to select the sample. Some of them are simple random sampling, stratified sampling, cluster sampling, quota sampling, convenience sampling, purposive sampling, and snowball sampling. The technique to be used depends on the research topic, research design, and the characteristics of the respondents.
5.3 PROBABILITY-BASED SAMPLING
METHODS
In probability-based sampling surveys, the data can be collected using the following methods: a) Through a sampling frame b) Random sampling without a sampling frame c) Intercept surveys d) Pre-recruited panels The researcher may use online sampling for Probability-based interviews and focus group discussions. a) Through a sampling frame b) Random sampling without a sampling frame

Digital Research Let's discuss these methods and understand how they can be used. Methods
1. Survey -- Through a sampling frame
An online or web survey is one of the most commonly used techniques for gathering data. This method sends a set of closed-ended questions to the selected respondents for the study. Individuals can be approached through emails, survey links, email groups or links embedded in the websites. The sample, sample size and response rates can vary in all these different modes of data collection. Online surveys are cost-effective and save time. Since the surveys are conducted through Internet tools, the respondents can fill out the forms at their convenience. These forms are designed so the respondents can easily indicate their replies, which are saved by the software. Like a normal face-to-face survey, the online mode also seeks information from respondents on a specific topic or phenomenon. Web surveys are conducted through the Internet, and the respondents receive a questionnaire that has been checked for validity and reliability. The way the questionnaire in a web survey is administered is the researcher's choice. He makes this choice after considering quite a few factors. The web survey can be administered through: a) Emails b) Web forms like Google Forms and Microsoft Forms c) Tools like Qualtrics and Survey Monkey. These tools can be designed to obtain structured and unstructured data. After all the respondents have submitted the forms, the data can be downloaded in CSV or Microsoft Excel format, making the data analysis much easier. For these surveys based on probability sampling, the researcher needs a sampling frame to start with. The sampling frame has to be corrected and updated. The researcher conducts probability sampling and identifies respondents based on the sample size from the sampling frame. The researcher also needs the contact information, preferably the respondents' email. Let's say the researcher happens to study university students and employees of an organization, or it's a study on the school students. The researcher may approach the university, school, or the company to seek contact details about all the employees. It is important that the researcher keeps this data private and uses it strictly for research purposes only. Once the sampling frame has been finalized, the researcher can apply a probability sampling technique and select the respondents for the study. The selected respondents can be contacted, and the questionnaire can be shared. This list- based sampling method is random, and the results can be generalized to a larger population. Stratified sampling can also be used in list-based probability sampling. The sampling frame should also have other information to enable the researcher to put respondents in different strata. The total number of people in the population should also be known for systematic sampling. The researcher must ensure the sampling frame has all the details required for cluster sampling. The researchers may choose to follow up the emails with a 76 telephone call to increase coverage and response rate. Systematic and cluster

sampling can also be implemented for web surveys. Methods Steps involved in an Online Survey: a) Outline the research objectives clearly. b) Identification of the research design.
c) Clearly Defined Target Sample
d) Precisely crafted survey questions. e) E. Execution of the sampling process f) F. Collection and Analysis of data. g) G. Reporting of results. Check your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are online probability and non-probability sampling?

2. What is sampling error?

3. How is list-based probability sampling different from non-list-based
probability sampling?

2. Random sampling without a sampling frame
This method does not use the sampling frame to select a sample. It's difficult to do online surveys without a sampling frame. Here, the researcher can randomly send emails or links to web forms to Internet users. This may have a high non-response rate since the email IDs might be incorrect. Moreover, the mail recipients may not be eligible for the study. Another method can be to locate and find email groups on the web. After discovering more about those organizations, the researcher can send his questionnaires to the email groups. The researcher must ensure that the group members qualify for the study. In that case, an accompanying email or some background information about the research project would be good.

Digital Research Also, the questionnaire should be designed so that people who don't qualify Methods can be eliminated after attempting the first few questions. Data consistency is questionable here as respondents might get biased, and their responses may give incorrect results.
3) Intercept surveys
In this method, every key visitor to a website is included in the sample. So, it can be seen as a form of systematic sampling. The responses are not recorded once the number of respondents per sample size is achieved. One major problem is that every kth visitor may not qualify to be a part of the sample. This person may not qualify in terms of demographics, subject area, or research purpose. This makes intercept survey sampling may be a very time- consuming process. This method is mainly used for consumer satisfaction surveys or by marketing companies who want to better understand their customers. The results from this systematic sampling can be generalized to the larger populations. Here, the population includes visitors who visit this website, regardless of their physical location. To record and specify the location of the visitors, the survey may allow devices with specific IP addresses only based on the region. Other issues with intercept surveys are the non-response and its bias. It is difficult to identify the reasons for non-response as no information is available about the persons who declined to participate in the intercept survey. There can also be a bias between heavy and light Internet users since heavy Internet users may ignore pop-ups. Bias can also come in since Internet users prefer different web browsers, and some may use pop-up blockers. The code in the browser used for stopping pop-ups may introduce bias in intercept surveys.
4) Pre-recruited panel
In this method, groups of individuals who have already agreed to participate in the research constitute the sample. These groups are selected in advance by using probability sampling techniques. These individuals are selected initially by contacting them by phone, email, or letter. This is a time-consuming process since the researcher must also ensure that the panel members qualify to be included in the research study. Pre-recruited panel surveys are generally used in longitudinal studies. Longitudinal studies justify the effort made to form and recruit panel surveys. Higher participation in the longitudinal studies makes the entire process cost-effective. Quite a few companies maintain panels drawn using probability sampling. Sub-samples can be drawn from these panels using probability sampling for research purposes. Some of these companies ensure that equipment and Internet access are available to all participants to maintain a panel that is a statistically valid cross-section of the population. In longitudinal panel surveys, there is a chance that over some time, participants may respond differently to surveys than first-time participants. This is called 'panel conditioning'.

5.4 NON-PROBABILITY SAMPLING-BASED
Methods
METHODS
In non-probability sampling-based surveys, the data can be collected using the following modes;
1. Entertainment polls
2. Surveys using 'harvested' email lists
3. Unrestricted self-selected surveys
4. Opt-in panels
5. Snowball sampling
1) Entertainment polls
Entertainment polls are 'surveys' conducted to know audience reaction to the TV shows & films they watch for entertainment. It captures the likes and dislikes of audiences through the online tools. This method collects data through websites which post open surveys. On the other hand, various TV shows conduct polls where the viewers are asked to vote for their favourite characters and their reasons for liking the TV show. These polls are designed to get an idea about the viewers' choices. TV producers plan contests around their shows and offer prize money to increase participation. Viewers who watch certain shows qualify to participate in the study. The genre of the show and the age category form the inclusion criteria for this method.
2) Surveys using 'harvested' email lists
In this method, email lists are harvested from the posts on the web. These posts can be on social media, emails, and email groups or may be available in user-generated content on websites and blogs. Third-party vendors run crawlers and extract the email from these posts. They then sell these emails to researchers or other marketing companies who want to target specific users based on their demographics, etc. The samples derived from harvested email lists are non-probability samples because they are based on a convenience sample of email addresses. Non-probability sampling techniques for harvested email lists differ from list-based probability samples, where the email addresses are drawn from the sampling frame given by some organizations.
3) Unrestricted self-selected surveys
Anyone can participate in this non-probability survey method. These surveys are posted on websites to facilitate participation in the surveys. These surveys can be promoted through online advertisements, pop-ups, and advertisements in traditional media. These surveys are not rigid about design. These surveys can be designed to be region-specific since they look at the products or services being offered there only. For example, a researcher can conduct a web-based survey to better understand the risks of consuming junk food among residents of Mumbai by posting a link to a survey on their " Food and Health" website. The inclusion criteria permit people of all ages and backgrounds to be participants.

Digital Research This method uses convenience sampling. As we know, the survey link Methods increases the reach and participation but is not seen as equivalent to online probability sampling. Alvarez et al. (2002) argue that samples drawn through non-probability sampling through the Internet can be used in experimental design where control and treatment groups can be randomly formed from the sample drawn.
4) Opt-in panels
In opt-in panels, respondents are selected based on their availability. The participants choose to participate in this method. The results cannot be generalized here since it is not probability sampling. Selection bias is an issue; for example, those working in tele-calling centres will likely be younger and computer literate. Limiting the respondents to a specific region is difficult in opt-in panels. The participants choose to join the panels and participate in the research.
5) Snowball Sampling
Snowball sampling is a non-probability sampling method where the initial participants give referrals to other participants. So, the initial set of participants helps identify more participants who can be included in the study. In the case of online sampling, the researcher can share the survey link, interview questions or the schedule with the first participant. Then, he can be requested to identify more participants. This method is generally appropriate for studies where the topic of research is rather sensitive, like alcoholism, studies on gays & lesbians, drug, and substance use, etc. The initial set of participants can share phone numbers or emails of other people who can be contacted through email or messaging apps. Through this procedure, the sample size grows bigger. The researcher generally interviews the participants selected through snowball sampling. The researcher may plan online interviews using Zoom, Google Meet, etc. The sample size in snowball sampling is generally kept low offline and online. In the case of snowball sampling, the first respondent may belong to a specific network or may have formed a closed network. For example, a network of hackers can be hidden away from the public. The researcher for this study may contact one of the members and then be told about other members he may contact online and gather data through interviews or telephonic conversations.
5.5 ONLINE SAMPLING FOR INTERVIEWS
AND FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSIONS
Interviews and focus groups provide rich data and are used to gather data that the researcher cannot get through surveys. The data is more detailed and subjective and covers different aspects of the research study. The sample size used in qualitative approaches is relatively small compared to the quantitative approach. The sampling technique for interview and focus group discussion can be probability or non-probability. A researcher can also use mixed-mode sampling, where probability and non-probability sampling are combined. As discussed, the researcher can use a sampling frame to identify participants 80 for an interview or can do without a sampling frame and adopt any technique

under the non-probability method. Researchers can use various web tools like Methods text-only chat, voice chat, or video chat to gather data. The researcher may also use video conferencing tools like MS Teams, zoom, and Google Meet for interviews and FGDs and, with the respondents' permission, can record the interviews to be transcribed later. Researchers must be careful when using technology and adhere to research ethics. In an online focus group discussion, the researcher uses specialized software to conduct a discussion where 8-9 people participate. The participants should be computer literate and have Internet access and a device. As in an interview, the FGD can be recorded with the participants' permission. The participants can be chosen purposefully and can be contacted through an email or phone call beforehand. This process involves non-probability sampling without a sampling frame. Online research interviews and FGDs have numerous advantages: * Online Interviews can be conducted from any place without geographical constraints. The cost of conducting online interviews is relatively low. * The researcher can also record facial expressions and body language using video conferencing. This makes the data much richer and gives a thick description. * Respondents feel more comfortable discussing sensitive issues through the Internet than face-to-face conversations.
5.6 SAMPLING FOR SOCIAL NETWORKS
The researcher can follow these steps to sample social media platforms like Facebook and X (formally Twitter). It's quite difficult to use list-based online probability sampling in these cases. Intercept surveys, unrestricted surveys, and availability sampling are preferred modes of data collection on social networks. The users' data is stored on servers and kept confidential; only database administrators have access to the records and schema of the database. The following steps are used in the sampling process of social networks.
A. Define the target population: The population can be based on
demographics, research interests, or other variables relevant to the study.
B. Choose a sampling method: The next step is choosing a sampling
method that depends on the research topic, objectives, and population characteristics.
C. Calculate the sample size: The number of participants required for the
study is calculated.
D. Take permission to access the data from social networks: The
researcher obtains consent from the users and requests the social network API to obtain data.
E. Analyse data: After collecting and analysing data using statistical tools,
F. Report the findings: Finally, the researcher presents the findings. He
may use visualizations and statistical analysis tools, such as SPSS, R, and Tableau.

Digital Research 5.7 MIXED-MODE SAMPLING FOR DATA
Methods
COLLECTION
In surveys, interviews, and focus group discussions, the researcher can also use a mixed-mode method for sampling. The researcher can use probability and non-probability sampling online to identify and contact the sample. The operational cost can be higher, but the benefit outweighs the cost since the response rate will go up in mixed-mode surveys. Vehovar and Manfreda (2017) argue that the reasons for combining data from online and traditional surveys are as follows: It has been seen that respondents are more comfortable with offline survey mode than online mode. The effective strategy is to ask respondents to use the online survey link, and then non- respondents can be requested to fill out the survey forms offline. This maintains the population coverage and response rates of a mail survey.
Advantages of Online Data Collection
Online data collection in social science has several benefits, some of them are: * Wider and faster reach: Gathering a huge volume of data in real-time through the Internet is easier. It also provides faster and wider access to the sample population than traditional techniques. * Cost-effectiveness: Online data collection technologies save time and are quite cheap. Data collection through the Internet involves no transportation, paper, or printing, and it saves the cost of the data entry operator. * Data in different formats and user-friendly approach: Data collection through the Internet has higher response rates. Moreover, the Internet facilitates data collection in various formats, both structured and unstructured. The data can be converted to user-friendly formats for quicker access and calculation. Issues and challenges in Internet-based survey sampling A frequent problem with large-scale, online surveys is the lack of a sampling frame. It is difficult to find a single list of email addresses for specific populations (government organizations, corporations, etc.), making list-based online sampling difficult. It is also impossible to implement a strategy without using a sampling frame for probability sampling, as the email addresses for an organization or a university for an entire population cannot be created. Random email addresses might be constructed using the names of individuals and organizations. Many of these constructed addresses may not work. In terms of coverage, it is widely recognized that online surveys using only samples of Internet users do not generalize to the general public. 52% of the Indian population had Internet access in the year 2022; thus, mobile phones are far from complete and vary state by state. So, any sample drawn from the Internet user population will have a coverage error.

Moreover, for online sampling and data collection, the target population must Methods be computer literate and have Internet access. A university or an organization may maintain a list of email addresses of all students studied so far, but that does not mean that every student has access to a computer and the Internet.
5.8 ETHICS OF ONLINE RESEARCH
a) Prior permission: As in traditional research, researchers should obtain consent for online research. Participants should be informed about the research and how their data will be used, as well as the risks and benefits of the study. b) Privacy of respondents: Researchers must respect participants' privacy, and their personal data should not be disclosed to any other person or organization. The researcher should take all measures to ensure the safety of this electronic data by encryption and preventing unauthorized access. c) Physical or psychological harm: During the research process, it should be seen that no psychological or physical harm is done to the respondents. d) Data Accuracy: The research process should ensure the accuracy and consistency of data, and the methods and instruments for data collection should ensure the validity and reliability of data. e) Respect for cultural and social diversity: Respondents should be explained the data collection process and how that data will be used. The research team should be sensitive to the respondents' cultural norms, ethnicity, and customs. Moreover, the team must be gender sensitive and demonstrate respect for social diversity. Compliance and acknowledgement: Researchers should use citations and properly acknowledge the sources used to avoid plagiarism. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Mention the advantages of interviews conducted through the Internet.

2. What are the challenges of doing online sampling for research?

Methods
3. What are intercept surveys?

5.9 LET US SUM UP
This Unit looked at sampling techniques using the Internet. Researchers can now contact respondents through emails, web links, and video chats and gather data. The selection process of respondents through a statistical process brings rigour to the study, and results can be generalized to a larger population. Not only this, but the respondents can also even be asked to fill out forms and submit them through the Internet. So, the entire process of identifying the respondents, contacting them, and then requesting them to participate and finally, the data collection can be done with the help of the Internet. The existence of email groups, social groups, social networks, and databases kept by different organizations has come to the rescue of the researcher as he often struggles to get an accurate and credible sampling frame for probability sampling. Sampling for web surveys, online interviews and online focus group discussions can be done using the Internet. Other data collection tools, such as observation and case studies, can also be used online. Here, the researcher must carefully outline the inclusion and exclusion criteria for his research. There are pitfalls in doing online sampling, and issues of coverage bias, non-response, sampling error, low sample size, and other types of bias appear. The researcher must consider all these points and plan his study accordingly to have significant findings.
5.10 KEYWORDS
Sampling error: Sampling error is the difference between a sample statistic and the population parameter estimated by the sample statistic. It can be understood as the difference between the true population value and the observed value from the sample. Sampling bias: Bias in sampling happens when the sample drawn from the population does not reflect the characteristics of the population. This indicates that the sampling method doesn't adequately represent the population; rather, the sample either over-represents or under-represents certain groups or characteristics present in the population. Purposive sampling: In this method, the researcher selects a sample that suits the purpose of the study. The researcher has a fairly good idea of the population and draws a sample of the appropriate size to meet the study's objectives. Cluster Sampling: It is a random sampling procedure in which one cluster is randomly selected from a collection of clusters. Initially, elements are kept in different clusters. The clusters must be individually inclusive and collectively exhaustive. Each component of the sample should be in one and only one cluster.

5.11 FURTHER READING
Methods
1. Bhat, A. (2023, October 12). Online research: Definition, Methods,
Types and Execution. QuestionPro. https://www.questionpro.com/blog/execute-online-research/
2. Clements, J. (2023, November 13). Online Research Interviews -
Advantages and top tools. MOS Transcription Company. https://www.legaltranscriptionservice.com/blog/online-research- interviews-advantages-and-top-tools/
3. Kumar, R. (2010). Research Methodology: A Step-by-Step Guide for
Beginners. United Kingdom: SAGE Publications
4. Menon, A. (2021). Online surveys. SurveySparrow.
https://surveysparrow.com/online surveys/
5. Sue, V. M., Ritter, L. A. (2011). Conducting Online Surveys. United
States: SAGE Publications.
6. Vehovar, V., & Manfreda, K. L. (2017). Overview: online surveys. The
SAGE handbook of online research methods, 143-161.5. 12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Online probability sampling involves selecting participants from a
known population using random sampling methods, ensuring that every member of the population has a chance of being included in the sample. This approach typically requires a sampling frame, such as a list of email addresses or registered users and employs random selection techniques like simple random sampling or stratified sampling to ensure representativeness. In contrast, online non-probability sampling involves selecting participants based on convenience or availability, without ensuring every member of the population has an equal chance of being selected. Common non-probability sampling methods include convenience sampling, snowball sampling, and quota sampling. While probability sampling offers greater generalizability and reduces sampling bias, non-probability sampling is often more practical and cost-effective for online research.
2. Sampling error refers to the discrepancy between the characteristics of a
sample and the characteristics of the population from which it is drawn. It arises due to the inherent variability in samples and the fact that samples are not perfect representations of their respective populations. Sampling error can occur due to factors such as sampling method, sample size, and random chance. It is important to acknowledge and quantify sampling error when interpreting research findings to assess the reliability and validity of the results.
3. List-based probability sampling involves selecting participants from a
predefined list or sampling frame, such as a directory of email addresses,

Digital Research registered users, or customer databases. This approach ensures that every Methods member of the population has a known and equal chance of being selected, thereby enhancing representativeness, and reducing sampling bias. In contrast, non-list-based probability sampling does not rely on a predetermined list but instead utilizes random sampling techniques to select participants from the population of interest. This may involve using random number generators or other random selection methods to identify potential participants from a broader population pool. While both approaches adhere to probability sampling principles, list-based sampling offers greater control and precision in participant selection, particularly when a comprehensive sampling frame is available, whereas non-list-based sampling may be more suitable when a sampling frame is not readily accessible or when random selection is preferred. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Internet interviews offer unparalleled accessibility and convenience,
breaking down geographical barriers and allowing researchers to reach participants from diverse locations without the constraints of physical presence. This not only broadens the pool of potential respondents but also facilitates flexible scheduling, accommodating participants' preferences and availability. Moreover, Internet interviews are cost- effective, eliminating expenses associated with travel, accommodation, and venue rentals, thus making them a more budget-friendly option, particularly for researchers with limited resources. The anonymity provided by online platforms encourages participants to share candid and honest responses, enhancing the quality of data collected. Additionally, the incorporation of multimedia elements enriches the data and improves accuracy, while real-time or asynchronous interview options enhance efficiency, enabling rapid data collection. Furthermore, Internet interviews contribute to sustainability efforts by reducing carbon emissions and environmental footprints associated with traditional research methods.
2. Online sampling for research poses several challenges that researchers
must navigate. Sampling bias is a prevalent concern, as certain demographics are more likely to participate in Internet-based research, leading to skewed results that may not accurately represent the target population. Furthermore, the digital divide exacerbates inequalities, excluding individuals from socio-economic backgrounds or geographic regions with limited Internet access or digital literacy. Privacy and data security issues also arise, necessitating robust measures to protect participants' personal information and ensure compliance with data protection regulations. Moreover, variability in response rates and technical difficulties such as Internet connectivity issues or device compatibility problems can compromise the representativeness and reliability of the data collected. Additionally, verifying the authenticity of respondents in online surveys presents challenges not encountered in face-to-face interviews, raising concerns about the integrity of the data.

3. Intercept surveys, conducted in public places by approaching individuals
Methods directly, offer unique advantages and challenges. These surveys provide spontaneous engagement, capturing immediate reactions and opinions from respondents in real-time. With higher response rates compared to other survey methods, intercept surveys yield valuable insights into public sentiment and behaviour. Moreover, conducting surveys in the context where decisions occur enhances understanding and relevance. However, intercept surveys also present logistical challenges, including identifying suitable locations, obtaining permissions, and managing interviewer training and supervision. Despite these challenges, intercept surveys remain a valuable tool for gathering on-the-spot data and gaining insights into public opinions and behaviours.

Methods

Methods Block
INTERNET RESEARCH METHODS - I
UNIT 6
Interview Method
UNIT 7
Experimental Research Method
UNIT 8
Visual Analysis
UNIT 9
Social Network Analysis

BLOCK 2 INTRODUCTION
Methods After learning the basics of Internet research in the previous Block, in Block 2, you will learn the various data collection methods. Each method is unique in this Block; you will learn two mostly used qualitative data collection tools (Interview Techniques and Visual Analysis), one classic example of a quantitative tool--experimental Research--and a Unit on social media data collection tools.
Unit 6 Interview Techniques, explains the diverse world of interviews,
exploring concepts, types, and ethical considerations. From informal to structured interviews, including telephonic and online surveys, we'll navigate through semi-structured and unstructured formats, emphasising interviewing skills and ethical guidelines.
Unit 7 Experimental Research Methods, explains the intricate nature of
experimental methods. We'll explore classic research designs and the experimental process, including controlling extraneous variables and randomisation. Additionally, we'll discuss experimental design variations and field experiments and analyse the merits and demerits of this method.
Unit 8 Visual Analysis, where we explore the intricacies of perception and
interpretation in images. Delve into topics such as Visuality, Iconology, Formalism, and Simulation. It uncovers the diverse methods of analysis, from Semiotics to Discourse Analysis, and investigates the scope of inquiry spanning historical, contextual, and personal dimensions.
Unit 9 is Social Media Analysis, where we learn about the intricate web of
digital interactions. We explore Social Networks and Social Network Analysis, unravelling the essence of connectivity. We will learn about data management and understand its nuances from collection to governance. We discover Network Theories in Cultural Anthropology, unveiling the dynamics of societal structures. Join us in deciphering the digital realm. These Units will give you a broader understanding of data collection from the online platforms, and you will be able to visualise your intended enquiries appropriately.

UNIT 6 INTERVIEW METHOD
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 Interview: Concept and Types
6.3 Informal Interviews
6.4 Structured Interviews
6.4.1 Telephonic Interviews
6.4.2 Online Surveys
6.5 Semi-structured Interviews
6.5.1 Planning Focus Group Discussions
6.5.2 Process of Focus Group Discussions
6.6 Unstructured (In-depth) Interviews
6.7 Interviewing Skills
6.8 Ethical Issues
6.9 Let Us Sum Up
6.10 Further Readings
6.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
6.0 INTRODUCTION
The interview is one of the most commonly used fundamental research techniques. The interview is a 'focused, purposive conversation' between the researcher and an informant - it involves asking questions, listening to individuals and recording their responses. You would have watched interviews with political leaders, celebrities, sportspeople, and even common people on television channels. Interviews are also conducted for jobs. The broad purpose of any interview is to obtain information. However, when we refer to 'interview as a research technique', its objective and focus are much more systematic and scientific in nature and approach, hence the need to understand the technique. In this Unit, we shall focus on interview techniques, which enable a researcher to obtain information that cannot be gained through other research methods.
6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Discuss Interview as a tool of data collection; * Describe different types of interviews - Informal, Structured, Semi- structured and Unstructured Interviews; * Examine the strengths, limitations and applications of each type of
Interview and

Internet Research * Apply interview techniques in your research study. Methods-I
6.2 INTERVIEW: CONCEPT AND TYPES
The term interview draws upon the French term 'entreuve ', which means 'to see one another or meet'. One of the important purposes of research is to get information about people. Many research methods and techniques are used for this purpose. These include methods such as observation. While the observation method involves the study of a phenomenon in natural settings and uncovers the ongoing and present activities of the respondent, it does not explore the past and the opinions, beliefs and motivations of a person. To get that information, it is imperative that the 'right questions' are asked; the interview technique allows us to do so. Interviews aim to explore why people behave in a particular way and what they think about something. It usually involves face-to-face interaction; however, technology allows interviews to be conducted online on social networking sites and telephones. Before proceeding further, let us first look at the different types of interviews. Interviews have been classified as structured, unstructured, formal, informal, and so on. For the purpose of our discussion, we shall follow the classification given by Berger (2000), as all these types of interviews are extensively used in communication research: * Informal Interviews * Structured Interviews * Semi-structured Interviews * Unstructured (In-depth) Interviews The focus of our discussion shall be on qualitative interviews--semi- structured and unstructured interviews--while the remaining two types shall be briefly touched upon to place them in a context.
6.3 INFORMAL INTERVIEWS
Informal interviews, also known as 'informal conversational interviews, ' can take place anywhere. As the name suggests, these are not organised systematically or focused on specific questions. The informal nature of the method allows the information to build naturally. Informal interviews are commonly used in field research to gain the subject's confidence. Informal interviews are generally one-on-one and generate highly individualised responses, which may vary from one person to another. Informal interviews have been found helpful in developing a big picture by obtaining and clarifying information. The individualised nature has helped obtain information on sensitive issues and can add depth to data obtained by other methods, such as participant observation. The interaction can be held even after intervals. In such types of interviews, especially those conducted in rural areas, it is possible that the subject may not be fully aware of the information being probed.

The technique is mainly proper at an individual level. It is less applicable to groups as it may not be possible to clearly understand what is being said in a group situation. Like any other data collection tool, it is necessary to establish a good rapport with the respondent to open up; hence, it may take more time than other forms of interviews. It also requires specific skills and care in asking questions, such as avoiding leading questions. The information obtained is random, so it may take a long or more than one session to cover all areas. Moreover, data from one respondent may not be comparable with other respondents as the nature of questions and the sequence is likely to vary from one person to another. Given the informal nature of the method, subjectivity may also creep in recording responses. According to Bertrand & Hughes (2005), if the primary concern of the research is to obtain individual descriptive responses, for instance, building upon observational data from fieldwork - these problems may not matter. However, if you wish to use your interviewees as a sample of a larger population, you will need to choose a more structured interview. Activity-2 Conduct an informal interview on a topic of your choice for five to ten minutes. Identify the pros and cons of undertaking such an Interview and list the issues involved. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List some strengths of Informal Interviews.

2. List some limitations of Informal Interviews.

6.4 STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS
Structured interviews are helpful in obtaining information about an issue's prevalence and distribution from many people. We discussed that questionnaires or interview schedules are designed in advance so that questions are carefully worded and delivered identically to all the respondents. The resulting data are quantitative and comparable, hence easier

Internet Research to analyse. Such interviews can be completed quickly in the field and thus are Methods-I relatively economical in terms of cost and time. We also discussed that greater skill is required while designing questionnaires or interview schedules, which must be pre-tested. Highly structured questionnaires yield little insight into how people feel about the issues involved, and the interviewer may not be able to respond to a valuable issue/situation that does not appear on the schedule and emerges during an interview. In a larger study, individual differences among interviewers may affect data quality. At times, it may be difficult to find those selected in the sample, while some people may be reluctant to answer some questions due to lack of time, disinterest, language barrier or sensitivity. Structured Interviews are also conducted using telephones and the Internet.
6.4.1 Telephonic Interviews
Telephonic interviews are relatively cheaper and easier to conduct. In such interviews, closed-ended questions are generally included as these are easier to administer to obtain feedback on an issue under study. Telephonic interviews have been found more useful in journalistic research, exploring a few focused questions. However, these have severe limitations as a data collection tool for academic research. Yet another limitation of a telephonic interview is that in the absence of a comprehensive mobile phone database, there is the possibility that some segments of the population may be systematically missed out. About a decade ago, access to telephones was limited to the affluent sections, but the spread of mobile phones has facilitated access to a diverse section of the population. In earlier times, the telephone directory published by the telephone departments in different cities used to provide address details and the location of the person listed, which is not available any more. Thus, it is possible that the sample may not be representative, leading to a skew in findings. Moreover, those contacted over the phone may not be interested in providing feedback, so they discontinue the interview midway or give superficial answers, thus affecting the data quality.
6.4.2 Online Surveys
Interviews are also conducted online by emailing questionnaires and uploading website links. The links take the respondents to different web pages listing the closed-ended questions. The respondent is expected to tick the appropriate response, and when all the questions on a page are responded to, s/he has to proceed to the next pages till all questions have been responded. An example of an online survey from different stakeholders to obtain feedback on the New Education Policy on Open and Distance Learning and Online courses is given below. In this survey, three questionnaires were uploaded on the IGNOU website requesting feedback from practitioners/experts/ learners and employers with a brief introduction and links:

New Education Policy: Survey on Open and Distance Learning and
Online Courses
The Ministry of HRD has entrusted the responsibility of developing a Draft Policy on Open and Distance Learning and Online Courses to IGNOU. In this connection, you are requested to provide us with your valuable feedback in the questionnaire relevant to you, available at the below link: Click here to participate in the Practitioners and Experts survey Click here for the Learner's survey Click here for the Employer survey A similar process is followed while using an email listserv in which the link to the questionnaire is emailed requesting feedback. It needs to be mentioned that in an online survey, the number of questions is generally kept small - not exceeding 25 to 30 as many a time, the respondent may lose interest midway, leading to a high rate of incomplete responses; thus, data loss. Further, using mobile phones and the Internet may reduce the cost of conducting surveys, but technology also introduces its own biases. For example, despite its increased outreach, access to technology is still limited in rural areas and certain sections of society, including women. In addition, linguistic and socio-cultural barriers may also affect data quality. Finally, response rates in online surveys are very low; as a result, data from online surveys can be taken only as indicative and not as definitive in terms of results. Activity-2 Prepare an Interview Schedule comprising 15-20 questions to study the social media usage patterns of the youth in your area. You may draw upon the do's and do n'ts of designing an Interview schedule. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are the uses of telephonic surveys?

2. What are the limitations of online surveys?

Internet Research 6.5 SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS
Methods-I Semi-structured interviews, as the name suggests, are neither structured (such as a field survey) nor freewheeling (like unstructured interviews) but placed somewhere in between. The roots of semi-structured interviews are in Ethnographic Research, and Focus Group Discussion (FGD) comes under this category, which has the inherent strength of collecting qualitative data from several people in the quickest possible time. In recent years, FGDs have been used precisely to find out how people respond in a group and how their feelings and opinions can be shaped by the experience of discussing the subject with others (Bertrand & Hughes, 2005). FGD is considered a user-friendly and 'non-threatening research method' that participants find stimulating and enjoyable. It has been found useful in assessing people's reactions to new products, services, messages, problems or ideas in a participatory mode. The sample size can be increased without increasing time and costs, which is relatively economical. It invites participants to monitor each other, providing checks and balances that do not operate for individual interviews or surveys (Bertrand & Hughes, 2005). FGDs also help people express themselves openly about sensitive issues and bridge social and cultural differences (Morgan, 1998). FGDs can provide a forum for participants to express themselves. For instance, feminist researchers use FGDs to "provide women with safe space to talk about their own lives and struggles" (Kamberelis & Dimitriadis in Brennen, 2013).
6.5.1 Planning Focus Group Discussions
Focus group discussions need to be carefully planned and executed. The researcher outlines a basic checklist of the areas/topics to be covered and who will attend the discussions. A group comprising 6-9 members is selected purposively to elicit data on opinions, beliefs, and experiences. FGDs are free-form discussions by a group of people, led by a moderator, designed to obtain information about some topic. To the greatest extent possible, the researcher tries to maintain the quality of the casual interviews found in unstructured interviews (Berger, 2000). Focus groups can be exploratory, and exercising less control over the groups can lead to wide-ranging discussions. The participants respond to the moderator and one another, and the conversations and reactions closely approximate normal conditions. It also gives freedom to the researcher to respond to any situation that emerges during the interview. However, FGD should not be considered as a simple way to get a lot of interviews in a hurry - they are 'focused efforts at gathering data'. Merely gathering people together does not guarantee a meaningful discussion, and there must be an effort to gather research data through such focused discussions. Some scholars argue that, like any other research method, conducting FGD in combination with other qualitative or quantitative research methods is useful. Often, focus groups are used as an exploratory technique and followed up with surveys to generalise results for larger populations. Morgan (1998), however, argues that for many purposes, the strengths of focus groups will be entirely sufficient and can be used for

varied purposes such as problem identification, planning, implementation and assessment.
6.5.2 Process of Focus Group Discussions
To conduct the FGD, you may start by introducing yourself and team members to establish rapport and explain the purpose of the session. You should share the need for audio/video recording or note-taking, mention the need for a checklist and explain its purpose. You must also obtain the group's informed consent for any such recording and ensure their participation is voluntary. Start the discussion with a focus question and invite responses; if you do not get any, address someone and keep the conversation going. Monitor the discussion and keep track of what needs to be covered. As a researcher, it is important for you to listen carefully - this will enable you to respond to new ideas and encourage those with something interesting to say. You should remain flexible if a useful debate is happening, but if the discussion goes off track, interrupt politely but firmly. You should refrain from giving your opinions or trying to reach a consensus, as that is not the purpose of the FGD. You must also make eye contact to involve everyone and stay in charge without being obtrusive. The discussion should keep moving and on track in light of research objectives. Time needs to be carefully monitored to elicit desired information. Limitations: FGDs are time-consuming and expensive. Selecting a representative sample is difficult, as people may refuse for various reasons. They are not easy to conduct effectively without proper training. The discussion has to be kept moving, and it should not falter at any stage. The data obtained from FGDs is not comparable, and complex analytical and interpretative techniques are required. Activity-3 Prepare a list of areas you wish to explore using FGD as a tool for data collection. Sequence them logically and frame them in the form of open- ended questions. As discussed above, administer these questions to a group of 6-8 participants and record the experience. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List some limitations of FGD.

Internet Research 2. Describe the role of a moderator for the success of FGD. Methods-I

6.6 UNSTRUCTURED (IN-DEPTH) INTERVIEWS
An unstructured interview is an 'open-ended conversational exploration of an individual's worldview and gives an insider's perspective'. In-depth interviews, also known as "intensive interviews", fall in this category. It is a key ethnographic data collection technique that is useful for a holistic inductive approach. The method is useful for collecting complex information on the respondents' opinions, beliefs, attitudes and personal experiences. In- depth Interviews collect qualitative data and are generally used to supplement the information collected through survey methods or participant observation. It does not follow a rigidly set structure - some basic questions are outlined, and the discussion is largely free-ranging. In-depth interviews elicit verbal responses, which are richer than written ones. These provide useful inputs/feedback for gaining a meaningful understanding of what might be a very different perspective. The sample size of an in-depth interview is generally kept small as a select few purposively selected people are subjected to a detailed interview, which can be scheduled at a mutually convenient time and place. Compared to the survey method, in-depth interviews allow the researcher flexibility to ask follow-up questions and seek clarification on an issue. The topics of in- depth interviews are generally in the form of tentative questions that allow the researcher to cover all the topics and probe further. In studies involving a large number of field investigators for data collection using in-depth interviews, you will have to orient and train the interviewers to create a common understanding and approach to the study. In such studies, it is useful to exchange notes with other interviewers at the end of the day/week to make necessary changes in approach based on their experience. Limitations: In-depth interviews, like any other form of data collection, also have inherent limitations. These can be conducted on a limited number of respondents and can be time-consuming. The researcher has little control over the responses as respondents tend to speak more about issues concerning them than the subject under study. Less caution can generate enormous data, which may be later difficult to organise and analyse, hence requiring more effort and skills on the researcher's part. Interviewing several people every day could be a tiring experience and may cause fatigue. The tendency to get personally involved with the interviewees may lead to the risk of introducing bias in the results as a researcher may impose his/her own perspective. It is possible that respondents may not be able to properly articulate what they actually think or believe at times. In such situations, the researcher will have to ask probing questions to seek clarity. Some respondents may give

'politically correct' statements for various reasons, and it will depend upon your skills as an interviewer to adequately examine their responses and arrive at findings. The purposive sampling technique is generally used for in-depth interviews, which involves choosing the region and the respondents for a specific purpose. In this regard, refer to the points discussed in Unit 4, Block-I on Sampling Methods. Activity-4 Do some background research before undertaking in-depth interviews with block-level officers on a development project of your choice. List some key areas for exploration and formulate questions about them. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List some limitations of in-depth interviews.

2. What steps will you take to plan an in-depth interview?

6.7 INTERVIEWING SKILLS
From the above discussion, it is clear that despite being a common data collection tool, interviews are difficult to conduct and require skills and a certain amount of tact. The following points are common to all the interviews discussed above and need to be kept in view while conducting Interviews: * You need to build rapport with respondents by making some introductory remarks about the purpose of the study and seeking their cooperation. Ensure you take informed consent that their participation is voluntary and they are willing to cooperate. * For better results, the interview may be preceded by a more general information gathering and observation exercise to identify critical areas for pursuing in greater depth.

Internet Research * You need to ask clear, neutral, and unambiguous questions. Loaded or Methods-I leading questions should be avoided, which will elicit leading answers (We have discussed different types of questions - leading, ambiguous, double barrel, etc. in Unit 7 of Block 2). * You need to stay focused, and the interview should keep moving in a direction consistent with the objectives of the study. If the discussion loses focus, the researcher should bring the discussion back to the main point. * If you do not understand something said by the respondent during the Interview, ask supplementary questions and explore the issue further to seek clarity. * As a researcher, it is extremely important for you to be a good listener and not give your own views on an issue. The Interview is not an exchange of information but obtaining information from the respondent. * You need to maintain neutrality and objectivity throughout the process of data collection and remain non-judgmental. Any show of signs through facial expressions, body language, etc., will likely impact the responses. * You should maintain a polite and formal interaction and be sensitive to the subject's entirely different perspective. * You should refrain from offering unsolicited advice and false promises, which may put you in an awkward position at a later stage. * Finally, you should check that all questions are covered, thank the respondents, and ask them if they have any questions.
Recording Medium
The recording medium needs to be carefully selected to ensure the accuracy of the information collected during the interview. These generally include handwritten notes or audio/video recordings. While taking notes, you must be extremely careful when listening and noting down the responses. It is often impossible to note down everything in the presence of the respondents. A good researcher goes back in time and tries to recall the entire sequence of events once the interview is over. In larger studies involving many interviewers, debriefing sessions are organised regularly for the exchange of information. If audio recording has to be conducted in rural areas, an adequate battery supply must be carried out as there may be a power failure. Video recording has been found useful for certain studies. However, the presence of a camera can make the subjects conscious, and they may put on an act or give politically correct answers. Please remember that informed consent for audio or video recording is mandatory. Transcription Once the Interview has been conducted and recorded, the entire conversation must be transcribed, which is time-consuming and tedious. Sometimes, it may take 5-6 hours to transcribe an hour-long interview. After transcription, the entire material has to be checked for accuracy and to make sense of the entire conversation. Then, the data has to be classified and coded under certain themes and categories using appropriate qualitative data analysis

techniques such as the constant comparative technique, the analytical induction strategy, etc. According to Berger, there are no absolute rules about coding, as a great deal depends on the nature of the material being coded. You will read more about qualitative data analysis in subsections 15.5 and
15.6 of Unit 15 of Block 4.6. 8 ETHICAL ISSUES
The purpose of research is knowledge production and generation. However, as researchers, you are not expected to adopt any means to obtain information; hence, some ethical norms will be in order while using Interviews as a research tool. Some of these ethical issues have been discussed in previous units, such as the participation of people in Interviews should be voluntary, and nobody should be compelled to participate. They need to be informed about the nature and objectives of the study and how the findings will be used. Further, they can opt out if they do not feel comfortable at any stage during the Interview. Thus, 'informed consent' forms the basis of selecting respondents, and if confidentiality has been promised, you must uphold it. You must treat all your research subjects respectfully and protect them from invasion of privacy and any physical, financial or emotional harm. Some subjects may not be capable of fully understanding the implications of your study and thus may be more vulnerable or sensitive for a particular subject. For example, when selecting children as subjects, you need to get the approval and cooperation of parents. Parents and legal guardians must be present when children are being interviewed. The recruitment of respondents is yet another ethical area, especially in FGD. Including respondents known to a researcher who does not meet the criteria for selection will lead to a skew in findings. Payment for participation is generally made in market research to cover the travel expenses and the time used. However, academic research has ethical implications as it may be argued that the study's findings have been compromised. Like other research methods, ethics are involved in data analysis and the reporting of interviews. According to Wimmer and Dominick (2003), data should not be tampered with, and the responses should not be fabricated or changed. Further, science is a public activity, and researchers have an ethical obligation to share their findings and methods with other researchers who may wish to examine the research instruments, methodology, sample selection, and other relevant items and apply them in their own research work. Activity-5 You have to collect data using interview methods from rural women on their reproductive health. Discuss some ethical issues involved. Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.

Internet Research 1. List some ethical issues that need to be considered while doing research. Methods-I

2. Why is publishing considered to be an obligation for the researcher?

6.9 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed interviews as a research method under the broad classification of informal, structured, semi-structured, and unstructured interviews. The strengths and limitations of each type of Interview were thoroughly discussed and analysed. The application, interview process, and care to be taken were described in detail. We also looked at some guidelines for conducting interviews and emphasised the need to follow certain ethical norms largely pertaining to minimising harm, respecting autonomy, protecting privacy, and others. As a researcher, you must consciously and systematically use the interview method to generate new knowledge and insights through your study.
6.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Berger, ArtherAsa (2000) Media and Communication Research
Methods, Sage Publications, London, New Delhi
2. Bertrand Ina & Peter Hughes (2005). Media Research Methods:
Audiences, Institutions, Texts, Palgrave MacMillan, New York.
3. Brennen Bonnie S. (2013). Qualitative Research Methods for Media
Studies, Routledge, New York
4. Krueger Richard A. (1998). Analysing and Reporting Focus Group
Results, Sage Publications, London
5. Morgan David L. (1998). Planning Focus Groups, Sage Publications,
London
6. Priest S. H (2010). Doing Media Research: An Introduction, Sage
Publications, New Delhi
7. Wimmer R.D. & Joseph R. Dominick (2003). Mass Media Research: An
Introduction, 4th edition, California, Wadsworth Series in Mass Communication.

6.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Informal interviews are useful in:
* Gaining confidence in the subject in the initial stages of field research * Obtaining information on sensitive issues * Adding depth to data obtained by other research methods.
2. Some limitations of informal interviews are:
* The information obtained is not systematic * Data from one respondent may not be comparable with other respondents * It is not effective for interviewing a large section of the population. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Telephonic interviews are:
* Relatively cheaper and easier to conduct * Select closed-ended questions can be easily administered to respondents * Useful in journalistic research exploring a focused area.
2. Online surveys have the following limitations:
* Access to technology is limited in rural areas and cannot cover all sections of society. * If a representative sample is not included, the findings of a study will be skewed. * Linguistic and socio-cultural barriers may affect the response rate and data quality. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Some limitations of FGDs are:
* Not easy to conduct without proper training * Difficult to select a representative sample who meets the specific criteria * The data obtained is not comparable and requires complex analytical techniques.
2. The moderator's role is crucial for the success of FGD. He or she has to
facilitate the discussion and keep it on track in light of research objectives. He or she has to respond to new ideas and encourage those with something interesting to say. He or she has to involve everyone in the discussion and stay in charge without being obtrusive.

Internet Research Check Your Progress: 4
Methods-I
1. Some limitations of in-depth interviews are:
* It requires more effort and skills on the part of the researcher * The researcher may impose his/her own perspective and introduce bias in the results * Interviewing several people every day may cause fatigue * Over-enthusiasm can generate enormous amounts of data that may be difficult to analyse later.
2. While planning an in-depth interview, I shall take the following steps:
* Outline some basic questions in light of the study objectives * Identify the respondents for the Interview * Outline the purpose of my study * Persuade them to participate in the study * Follow up with them, as it may take several attempts * Schedule the interviews at a convenient place and time. Check Your Progress: 5
1. The following ethical issues need to be kept in view while doing
research: * Informed consent and voluntary participation of the respondents * Providing information to them about the research objectives and process * Protecting them from invasion of privacy * Protecting them from any form of physical, financial or emotional harm.
2. Publishing scientific results is an ethical obligation on the researcher. As
science is a public activity, researchers need to share their methods and findings with other researchers who may wish to examine the research process followed and apply it in their own work. The knowledge thus accrued is shared with other scholars, enabling society at large to benefit from the results.

UNIT 7 EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH
Research Method
METHOD
Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 Nature of Experimental Method
7.3 Classic Experimental Research Design
7.4 Process of Experimental Research
7.4.1 Control of Extraneous Variables
7.4.2 Randomisation
7.5 Experimental Design
7.5.1 Factorial studies
7.5.2 Quasi experimental design
7.6 Field Experiments
7.7 Merits and Demerits of Experimental Method
7.8 Let Us Sum Up
7.9 Keywords
7.10 Further Readings
7.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
Communication research has established itself firmly and is a fertile field for young researchers. The area is rich, vast, and varied. The experimental method is a well-established media research method, but its use is restricted. There is a tendency among researchers to opt for the survey method. Experimental research is highly popular in psychology and social psychology. In the case of media research, the experimental method can produce an enormous amount of data. However, media researchers find several issues in conducting experiments. For instance, the method is largely quantitative and uses extensive statistical procedures for analysis. Issues relating to infrastructure, i.e. getting the appropriate testing conditions and/or getting matching subjects for experiments, pose problems for researchers. There can be laboratory experiments or field experiments. The purpose is to find out and establish a causal relationship between an independent variable and a dependent variable. This method is also amenable to statistical analysis depending on the data generated. We have discussed earlier that the selection of a research method depends upon the topic and the researcher's methodological approach to it. The experimental technique supports an empirical approach to research.

Internet Research 7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Methods-I After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Discuss the nature and method of experimental research; * Describe the process of classic experimental research design; * Differentiate between experimental and quasi-experimental designs; * Explain the nature and scope of field experiments; and * Outline the advantages and disadvantages of the experimental method of research.
7.2 NATURE OF EXPERIMENTAL METHOD
As already stated, the experimental method is widely used in natural sciences and certain social science disciplines. Being quantitative, experiments attempt to determine the cause-and-effect relationship between factors. In other words, they help establish and find out cause and effect. Of course, there are differing views. Some scholars think finding a cause-and-effect relationship between two variables, independent and dependent, is not easy. Nonetheless, the experimental method is one of the effective methods in which the researcher can control the time order when presenting two variables. This enables him/her to ensure that the cause happens first and then the effect and s/he can also control other possible causes of the variable being studied. The experimental method is scientific in nature and character. As science makes progress, its forms of explanations also keep changing. Since social sciences adopt scientific methods of empiricism, their explanations of social phenomena also keep changing. Explanations are categorised into deductive and probabilistic. This classification is based on the types of generalisations an explanation employs. Let us take the deductive explanation for evaluation. The pre-conditions of a deductive explanation are;
1) A universal generalisation.
2) A statement of conditions which generalises appear true.
3) An event to be explained (explicandum), and
4) The rules of logic.
The law of gravitation is a good example of a deductive explanation. Its applicability encompasses past, present, and future. In natural sciences, deductive explanations are made possible with manipulation and control through experimentation. Experiments help us demonstrate the effect of one phenomenon on another phenomenon. However, only a few phenomena of interest to social scientists are susceptible to manipulation and control. Yet, certain ethical questions relate to social scientists' manipulation of social phenomena. Besides, most human factors are not amenable to natural scientists' research methods.

Social scientists mostly prefer to have probabilistic explanations. A
Research Method
generalisation is supposed to provide evidence for the phenomena under investigation. No explanation can be deduced from the generalisation. In universal generalisation, we may say 'All A is B', whereas a probabilistic generalisation will say that 'n per cent of A and B'. Probabilistic explanations are weak compared to deductive explanations. Probabilistic explanations have a minimal predictive capacity. The deductive explanation is strong in its predictive power.
7.3 CLASSIC EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH
DESIGN
A classic experimental research design contains two groups for comparison. One is an experimental group, and the other is a control group. These two groups are equal in every respect. However, there is one difference. The experimental group is administered or exposed to an independent variable called the experimental stimulus, and the control group is not exposed to the experimental stimulus. Measurements on the dependent variable are called scores and are taken twice from each group. The first measurement is known as the pre-test. It is taken before administering experimental stimulus to the experimental group. The control group also undergoes measurement. The second set of measurements takes place after the experimental group is exposed to the experimental stimulus. This is known as the post-test. The control group, of course, is not exposed to the experimental stimulus. But both groups are measured. The difference in measurement between the post- test and pre-test will be compared in the experimental and control groups. In the case of the difference in the experimental group, we can safely assume that the independent variable causes changes in the dependent variable or that the independent variable affects the dependent variable and is causally related to the dependent variable.
Group Pre-test Post-test Difference
Experimental Ml M2 M2-Ml =Ra
Control M3 M4 M4- M3 =Rb
Selden Menefee and Audrey Menefee, who visited the Tiptur area of Karnataka, conducted an experimental study using a mimeographed newspaper to measure the information level of the sample subjects chosen. When the measurements were compared between the experimental group and the control group, it was found that the information level of the experimental group had gone up due to the exposure to the mimeographed newspaper more than the control group that was not exposed to the newspaper, the experimental stimulus. This meant that exposure to the newspaper caused an increase in the information level of those exposed to it.

Internet Research Check Your Progress: 1
Methods-I Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is the primary purpose of the experimental method?

2. Identify the pre-conditions of a deductive explanation.

3. Briefly explain the classical experimental method.

7.4 PROCESS OF EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH
The experimental method involves two operations: manipulation and observation. Researchers manipulate an independent variable in scientific jargon and observe the subjects' consequences or responses to the dependent variable. Each experiment may be different, but every researcher must consider the common steps to follow. Below is a direct quotation from Wimmer and Dominick (2003), who have identified the steps as follows:
1) "Every researcher has to select the setting. Most experiments are
conducted in a laboratory or any other environment that is under the investigator's control. Experiments are also conducted in natural settings, but the researcher has limited control over them.
2) Any research will have to select the experimental design. The hypotheses
or research question will determine the appropriateness of the design. The types of variables available for manipulation or evaluation, the availability of respondents, and the availability of resources will impact the design selection.
3) Operationalise the variables: In experimental research, the independent
variables are operationalised after their creation through manipulation. Scales or rules are constructed to categorise behaviour observations to operationalise the dependent variables.

4) Decide how to manipulate the independent variable. A set of clear and
Research Method
specific instructions, events or stimuli is developed to manipulate the independent variables and present them to the experiment subjects. The two types of manipulations are straightforward and staged. "In straightforward manipulation, written materials, verbal instructions, or other stimuli are presented to the subjects". The investigators create events and circumstances that help them manipulate the independent variable if it is staged manipulation. It can be simple or elaborate. The use of a confederate is also in vogue. A confederate is a person who acts like a subject, but in reality, he is also part of the manipulation.
5) Select and assign subjects to experimental conditions. The best way to
guarantee external validity is to select the subjects randomly from the population and assign them to the experimental and control groups.
6) Conduct a pilot study: A pilot study involving a small number of subjects
will reveal problems and enable the investigator to make suitable corrections and revisions. It is done to determine whether manipulating the independent variable has had the desired effect.
7) Administer the experiment: The main phase of research is data
collection. Experimental manipulations are done on the subjects, either individuals or groups. Then, the effect of the independent variable is measured, and the subjects are debriefed. While debriefing, the investigator explains the objectives and consequences or implications of the study undertaken.
8) Analysis and interpretation of results: The subjects' scores on the
dependent variables measured are tabulated and statistically analysed. Then the investigator interprets the results.
7.4.1 Control of Extraneous Variables
In media research, an investigator encounters unwanted extraneous variables. He or she must remove or control them to ensure the internal validity of the instrument/ method employed for research. These extraneous variables are also called confounding variables, which normally contaminate and complicate the findings. The environment, experimental manipulations, experimental design, and the assignment of subjects to both experimental and control groups control the confounding variables. Generally, three types of techniques are used in assigning subjects to groups. They are: * Randomising * Matching * Generalisation Matching and randomisation are the two methods of control. Matching control variables are known to the researcher before the research process starts. Randomisation will enable him/her to remove the effect of unexpected or not- seen-before factors.

Internet Research Matching is a method to equate the experimental group with the control Methods-I group on external variables presumably related to research hypotheses. The two methods of matching the groups are precision matching and frequency distribution. Precision matching is also known as pairwise matching. Each subject in the experimental group is matched by another one in the control group with the same characteristics. For example, if one person is 30 years of age in the experimental group, another subject in the control group will also be of the same age. The problem with this method is the difficulty of matching many variables. Pairwise matching is a tough task. Precision matching has a very high number of losses of cases in the absence of compatible twins. This is usually substituted by frequency distribution. Here, experimental and control groups are matched separately rather than in combination for each variable. It is not one-to-one matching, but these two groups are matched on identified central characteristics. For instance, the average age of one group should match the average age of another. This may be less precise, but it is easy to manage. As we know, matching can control a limited number of pre- identified extrinsic variables. A good number of confounding variables may affect the relationship between independent and dependent variables.
7.4.2 Randomisation
One cannot be sure of eliminating the confounding variables. Hence, there is scope for wrong interpretation of results. This can be avoided by opting for randomisation - a process by which subjects are assigned to the experimental and control groups. The assignment can be done by flipping the coin, using a table of random digits, using the lottery method, or any other suitable method. This will ensure an equal probability of being selected for the experimental or the control group. Randomisation will remove any systematic mistake because extrinsic variables may relate to independent or dependent variables. Internal validity is important in communication research. Another equally significant aspect of research is the generalisability of the findings. The effect of one variable on another in a natural setting and on a bigger population is known as the external validity of research designs. It also refers to the ability to generalise the research findings. Two factors related to external validity that can affect the generalisation of research results are the representativeness of the sample and the reactive arrangements. Random assignment of subjects to the experimental and control groups will ensure equality between the groups and the investigation's internal validity. However, it may not represent the larger population, only the sample selected. A high rate of refusal and enormous cost may affect opting for a highly representative sample. Next will be the reactive arrangements. The results of a study should be generalised not only to a large population but also to a real-life situation. This is difficult to accomplish. It may result in a reactive effect of testing on the subjects. For instance, a pre-test may affect subjects' responses to the experimental stimulus. Such an effect can be avoided by opting for a post-test only.

Check Your Progress: 2
Research Method
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the two operations involved in the experimental method.

2. List the common steps to follow in experimental research.

3. Briefly explain the three factors that can be used to control the
confounding variables.

7.5 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
The experimental design refers to the 'total experimental plan or structure of the research'. It is selecting and planning the experiment related to a research problem. The simple procedures are pre-test, experiment, and post-test. Other factors like variables, sampling, control, and the construction of a measuring instrument should also be included in the process. Normally, research designs are classified as experimental and quasi-experimental. We have already discussed the basic procedure of a classical research design. Some of the popular experimental designs are recounted here: a) Pre-test-post-test control group The pretest-posttest control group design is one of the basic procedures commonly adopted by media researchers. This procedure helps control rival hypotheses because of the effects of maturation, testing, history, and other sources. Each group faces the same situations during the experiment. This is the other name for classical experimental design. b) Post-test, the only control group There is a possibility of subjects becoming sensitive to the experiment during the pre-test. In the post-test-only control group method, neither the experimental nor control group is exposed to the pre-test. Only the experimental group is exposed to the independent variable, which will be a post-test of the group. Then, the two groups are compared to the presence of statistical significance. This helps control the rival explanation as both groups are equally affected by factors like maturation, history, and others.

Internet Research c) Solomon four-group design Methods-I We have already observed that a pre-test has its own merits and demerits. It enables us to assess the time sequence and is the basis of comparison. Yet, we may have reactive effects in the process. More than that, these are occasions where we may not be able to have the luxury of a pre-measurement period. The Solomon four-group design will have the same features as a classic experimental research design. The difference is that an additional set of control and experimental groups will not be made subject to pre-testing. When we have two experimental and control groups each, the comparisons will show whether the experimental stimulus (x) has independently affected the groups that were not made sensitive by a pre-test. If we find that the experimental stimulus had its effect without a pre-test, the findings can be generalised to the target population. The element of causality will increase in its strength.
7.5.1 Factorial studies
When a researcher analyses two or more independent variables simultaneously, it is called factorial design. In this, each independent variable is called a factor. The factorial study has advantages like saving time, money, and resources. It allows the investigator to know the interaction between two or more - dependent variables and the effects they cause on the dependent variable. If we say that it is a two-factor design, it means that two independent variables are manipulated. The same applies to a three-factor design where three independent variables are manipulated. Factors can have two or more levels. An example here will make understanding it easy. Imagine that there is an advertising campaign on radio and television. The subjects of these media are assigned two groups, one that is exposed to the radio and the other to television. These are known as two levels of investigation.
7.5.2 Quasi experimental design
The quasi-experimental design is not suitable for application in certain research situations. This is especially true when manipulation and random assignment of respondents are impossible. In social sciences, two types of relationships are identified. The first is the stimulus-response, and the second is the property- disposition relationship. For the first one, reward and satisfaction or advertisement and consumption levels can be given as examples. For property-disposition relations, attitudes, values, and orientations can be examples. Stimulus- response situations are best suited for experimental methods, while quasi-experimental designs can tackle property- disposition. The four areas of difference between these two types of designs are identified.
1. The time gap between the effect of an independent variable and the
response to it. In stimulus -- response relations, the time interval is short. In contrast, property disposition relations are longer.

2. A stimulus is easy to isolate, and its effect can be well-described. On the
Research Method
other hand, properties like social class are unclear, and dispositions like prestige and education have their own effect on other elements.
3. The 'before and after' comparison is easy in experimental studies and
difficult in quasi-experimental studies. For example, two groups with different properties and dispositions cannot be compared. An upper-class group differs from a lower-class group on many counts, like values and social practices.
4. The time sequence of events varies in experimental research, and the
direction of causality is clear for pre- and post-comparisons. However, the time sequence is difficult to establish in a property-disposition relationship. As such, manipulation, comparison, and control cannot be easily applied to property-disposition relationships. Experimental methods are strong on control but weak on representation. Quasi- experimental studies, particularly surveys, are strong on representation but weak in control. Experiments can control both extrinsic and intrinsic variables through randomisation. They also have control over the introduction of experimental stimuli. This helps them in determining the direction of causation. These advantages cannot be seen in quasi- experimental designs. On the other, laboratory experiments cannot replicate social life. Quasi-experiments will not have the random assignment of subjects to experimental groups. The major quasi- experimental designs are pretest-posttest, non-equivalent control group design, and interrupted time- series design. The one-shot case study, correlational designs, panel, and trend studies are also considered types of quasi-experimental studies by some scholars, though they can be longitudinal studies. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the Solomon four-group methods.

2. Distinguish between stimulus-response and property-disposition
relationships.

Internet Research 3. List the four areas of difference between experimental and quasi- Methods-I experimental designs.

7.6 FIELD EXPERIMENTS
As you are aware, laboratory experiments are artificial, so they do not have external validity. In contrast, field experiments have external validity. Subjects react in their natural setting with normal behaviour. For example, watching a TV commercial in a laboratory setting differs from viewing it in a natural setting. One of the characteristics or advantages of field experiments is that they are closer to reality and often non-reactive. Complex social processes and events can be studied. Field experiments can be less expensive as they do not need special equipment. Yet, if the size of the study increases, then the expenditure may also increase. Sometimes, field experiments are the only option left in certain social situations. There are a few practical difficulties with the field experiments. For instance, certain research studies cannot be done in the field for ethical reasons. The impact of television violence on children cannot be measured through field experiments. Field experiments now and then face external obstacles that may be unexpected. It is time-consuming when the researcher wants to establish contacts, seek cooperation, and obtain necessary permission. Often, this procedure takes weeks and months. The field experiment's most difficult part is controlling intervening variables. The extraneous variables will affect the accuracy of experiments and, in turn, the entire research work.
Types of Field Experiments
Field experiments have been categorised into two: experiments in which the investigator manipulates the independent variable and the other in which manipulation of the independent variable happens naturally. Wimmer and Dominick provide an example for the first type. Imagine an investigator who wants to know the effects of being unable to read a newspaper. The option is to choose two comparable samples and not allow one sample to read a newspaper for some time. The second sample will continue to read the newspaper. Later, a comparison will be made to determine the effect on other areas of life, such as interpersonal communication. The other types of field experiments deal with passive manipulation of the experimental stimulus. In some cases of field experiments, the investigators may not be able to assign subjects randomly to experimental and control groups. Such field experiments are known as quasi-experiments. One major challenge for a researcher is to guard against alternative explanations.

7.7 MERITS AND DEMERITS OF
Research Method
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Like every research method in social sciences, the experimental method has advantages and disadvantages. The practical advantages of experiments are: a) Evidence of causality: Experiments enable us to determine the cause- and-effect relationship between an independent and dependent variable. They also support controlling the time order and other possible causes of research efforts. b) Control: As already stated, control is an advantage of the experiments. An investigator will control the environment and isolate the testing from other influences and effects. This means that they can structure the experimental setting according to their choice. However, the artificial nature of the laboratory setting is a disadvantage. The selection and control of subjects are other advantages of experimental research. c) Cost: Experiments can be less expensive compared to other research methods. d) Replication: The experiments can be replicated. Since the conditions under which they are conducted are clearly described, it becomes easy for others to repeat them. Modifications can also be made. Disadvantages: The experimental method has its disadvantages: a) Artificiality: As already stated, the artificiality of the research environment is a major problem in experiments, as behavioural alterations take place when media researchers employ the laboratory setting. Because of the artificial environment in the laboratory, results that emanate from these do not resemble behaviour in a natural atmosphere or real-life situation. In real life, subjects are exposed to competing stimuli from other sources. The artificiality may affect the external validity of the research. b) Researcher bias: The experimenter can influence the experiment so that he or she can get the result according to the pre-decided hypotheses. To avoid this type of bias on the researcher's part, a technique called double- blind is used. In this, neither the researchers nor the subjects will know whether a particular subject is given to the experimental or control group. c) Limited scope: Only select research questions can be experimented upon. When issues and topics in mass communication concern a large number of people, experiments on a massive scale are not possible. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.

Internet Research 1. What are the characteristics of field experiments? Methods-I

2. Identify the categories of field experiments.

3. Enumerate the advantages and disadvantages of the experimental
technique.

7.8 LET US SUM UP
The experimental method is a technique used in communication research. However, its adoption is restricted in media research, unlike in psychology and social psychology. Natural sciences make the best use of experimental research. Experiments attempt to find out the relationship between factors of cause and effect. These enable us to ensure that the cause is scientific. Explanations in social sciences are classified as deductive and probabilistic. Deductive explanations are strong as their applicability encompasses the past, present, and future. In natural sciences, deductive explanations are made possible with manipulation and control. But in social sciences, only a few phenomena are amenable to manipulation and control. A classic research design contains two equal groups: experimental and control. The experimental group is exposed to experimental stimulus, and the control group is not. The measurements taken during the pre-test and post- test are compared to know whether the experiment involves manipulation and control, which are difficult to achieve in social sciences. The experimental technique normally has eight steps. Control of confounding or extraneous variables can be done by matching, randomisation, and generalisation. Internal and external validity will have to be achieved in experimental research. There are two designs when we deal with experimental methods: Experimental design and quasi- experimental designs, pretest-posttest control group, post-test only group, and Solomon four-group designs belong to experimental design. When a researcher analyses two or more independent variables simultaneously, it is called a factorial study or design. Here, each

independent variable is called a factor. Pretest-posttest non-equivalent control
Research Method
group designs and interrupted time series designs belong to the category of quasi experiments. Experimental designs are unsuitable for application in certain research situations, especially when manipulation and random assignment of respondents are impossible. Experimental designs are best suited to stimulus- response relationships but not to property-disposition relationships. Quasi- experimental designs, including one-shot case studies, correlational designs, and panel and trend studies, can tackle the property-disposition relationships. Field experiments are conducted in natural settings. They are closer to reality and often non-reactive. They do not need any special equipment. The costs can be lower compared to other methods. The advantages of experimental methods are evidence of causality, control, cost-benefit, and replication. The disadvantages are artificiality, researcher's bias, and limited scope.
7.9 KEYWORDS
Confounding variables : Variables which are extraneous to the experiment. They contaminate the findings. Deductive explanation : An explanation that has the element of generalisation regarding past, present and future. Empiricism : Verification with strong evidence. Explicandum : An event or phenomenon to be explained. Manipulation : Deliberately produce a change in the phenomenon selected. Pilot study : Involves a small number of subjects on whom the study is conducted. Subjects : People who are selected to participate in the experiment. Verstehen : A tradition of understanding human behaviour.
7.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Broota, K.D (1992), Experimental Design in Behavioural Research, New
Delhi, Wiley Eastern Limited.
2. Nachmias, David and Chava Nachmais (1976), Research Methods in the
Social Sciences, New York, St. Martin's Press.
3. Priest, Susanna Hornig (2010), Doing Media Research: An Introduction,
New Delhi: SAGE Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
4. Wimmer D. Roger and Joseph R. Dominick (2003), Mass Media
Research, Belomont (USA) Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.

Internet Research 7.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Methods-I
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The main purpose of the experimental method is to determine the
relationship between factors of cause and effect. Experiments are more suitable for natural sciences than social sciences. In other words, experimental research attempts to determine the cause-and-effect relationship between an independent variable and a dependent variable.
2. The four pre-conditions of a deductive explanation are:
* A universal generalisation * A statement of conditions which generalises appear true * An event to be explained (explicandum) The rules of logic.
3. A classical experimental research design has two equal groups for
comparison: experimental and control. The experimental group is exposed to the experimental stimulus, but the control group is not, for post-test. The difference between the post-test and pre-test on the measurements taken will prove that the independent variable affects the dependent variable. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The two operations involved in experimental research are manipulation
and observation. In scientific jargon, researchers manipulate an independent variable and then observe the subjects' response to the dependent variable.
2. The eight steps involved in experimental research are selecting the
setting, selecting the experimental design, operationalising variables, manipulating the independent variable, selecting, and assigning subjects to experimental conditions, conducting a pilot study, administering the experiment, and analysing and interpreting extraneous variables.
3. The confounding variables can be controlled by matching,
randomisation, and generalisation; matching can be either precision matching or frequency distribution. Randomisation can be done by assigning the subjects to experimental and control groups using different methods. It is called generalisation if the findings can be applied to a large population. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The Solomon four-group design will have the same features as the
classic experimental research design, except that it will have an additional control and experimental set of control and experimental groups not subjected to pre-testing. The findings can be generalised if we

find that the experimental stimulus had its effect without a pre-test.
Research Method
2. The stimulus-response relationship is based on a reward-satisfaction
proposition. The property-disposition relationship is based on attitudes, values, and orientations. The first one is amenable to experiments, while the property-disposition relations are taken in the case of quasi- experimental designs.
3. The four areas of difference between experimental and quasi-
experimental designs are the time gap between the effect of the independent variable and the response to it; a stimulus can be easily isolated, but properties are not; before and after comparison; and the variation in time sequence. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Field experiments are carried out in natural settings, which gives them
external validity. Subjects will react with their normal behaviour. Field experiments are non-reactive, less expensive, and do not need special equipment or facilities.
2. There are two types of field experiments: Experiments in which the
researcher manipulates the independent variable and the other in which manipulation of the independent variable happens naturally.
3. The advantages of the experimental method are evidence of causality,
control, less cost, and replication. The demerits are artificiality, the researcher's bias, and limited scope.

In ternet Research
UNIT 8 VISUAL ANALYSIS
Methods-I Structure
8.0 Introduction
8.1 Learning Outcomes
8.2 Visual and Visuality
8.3 Iconology
8.4 Formalism
8.5 Simulation
8.6 Scope of Inquiry
8.6.1 Contextual Inquiry
8.6.2 Historical Inquiry
8.6.3 Personal Language
8.6.4 Reflexivity
8.6.5 Communities and Culture
8.6.6 Philosophy and Visuality
8.6.7 Hybridisation
8.7 Sites and Modalities
8.8 Methods of Visual Analysis
8.8.1 Semiotics
8.8.2 Content Analysis
8.8.3 Discourse Analysis
8.9 Let Us Sum Up
8.10 Keywords
8.11 Further Readings
8.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.0 INTRODUCTION
Today, more than ever, we live in a world of images. We are bombarded by images everywhere. The centrality of images in our lives cannot be ignored anymore. Our perception of ourselves and the world around us is largely influenced by images. In fact, images have become pervasive, with their application in every field or discipline, be it medicine or anthropology, defence, or communication. In the entire history of mankind, people have never consumed or produced images on the scale we are witnessing now. The images are almost saturated. "The spectacle is the leading production of present-day society," claimed Guy Debord. The possibilities of image craft have been extended boundlessly with digital technologies, particularly information and communication technologies, that aid in creating, altering, and transmitting images. Though image-making or

image-reception is as old as the hills and has been common across human cultures and civilisations, digital devices and the Internet have revolutionised the very impulse of visual imagination, redefined the ways of living, and made the ubiquity of images inevitable. Indeed, there can be no denial of the pre-eminence of technology. As Marshall McLuhan professed, every technology alters man's psychic and social complex, all the more so with digital technology, which has a profound impact on our sensory environment. In a way, the arrival of the Internet, has led us to the age of image. From emojis, selfies, memes, PPTs, and VR games to 3D views, a whole gamut of new images has come to occupy our lives. We are confronted with an image- based culture that is challenging the print culture in many ways. The expanse of images has given birth to terms like ocularcentrism and visual pollution to mention a few. On the one hand, as many scholars have argued, there is the democratisation of image production, transmission, and consumption, with a majority population involved. On the other hand, there is the overarching concern over distraction or loss of control over it. Then, there is this discourse on the relationship between the image world and the real world - whether the real world constructs the image universe or vice versa. There are arguments that 'life has receded into representation' (Guy Debord). Further, there is a debate on the authenticity of the image itself. With software like Photoshop enabling immense editing possibilities and after- effects, the dichotomous relationship between the original and the manipulated image is being re-examined in a different plane of postmodernity. In the context of the mechanical reproduction of art, accentuated by printing technologies, Walter Benjamin argued about the loss of authenticity, aura, and cult value. With digital technologies enabling instant replication, sharing, and altering images, the discourse has moved to simulation and hyperreality, where there is a copy but not the original. Stuart Hall's ideas on reception provide another dimension - how the audience can decode these images - dominant reading, negotiated reading and oppositional reading. When it comes to analysing images/visuals, there are six basic perspectives-- personal, cultural, historical, technical, critical, and ethical. An image or a set of images can be analysed with one or a combination of these perspectives, which leads to different kinds of inquiries. Generally, the focus is on formal elements and/or content. Later in this chapter, we will investigate the types of inquiry and basic visual analysis methods.
8.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing the Unit, you should be able to: * Appreciate the significance of visuals in society; * Grasp basic debates about visual culture; * Outline the types of inquiries in studying visuals;

Internet Research * Identify the sites and modalities; and Methods-I * Understand various methods in visual analysis.
8.2 VISUAL AND VISUALITY
By virtue of our vision, all of us can see images/visuals. We see photos, memes, movies, ads, paintings, etc. Images can convey information and ideas. They can also be used for aesthetic pleasure and entertainment. The purposes of images have varied with time, place, and person. They can serve various purposes, including spiritual, cultural, political, aesthetic, and commercial. So, what is an image? In his book Ways of Seeing, John Berger defines an image as "sight which has been recreated or reproduced. It is an appearance, or a set of appearances, which has been detached from the place and time in which it first made its appearance and preserved for a few moments or a few centuries." Images can be broadly classified into one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) images. A one-dimensional image has only one plane, i.e., length and no width. For example, a straight line. In the case of 2D images, there are two planes - length and breadth, like in a drawing, and 3D, there are three planes - length, breadth, and height, as in sculpture. A two-dimensional image is flat. A three-dimensional image has volume. Also, images have visual elements or properties like line, shape, volume, colour, size, texture, tone, and pattern depending on the medium and form. On the other hand, visuality refers to how vision is constructed in various ways: 'how we see, how we are able, allowed, or made to see, and how we see this seeing and the unseeing therein,' as Gillian Rose quotes. Every image leads us to see something in a certain way. This is precisely where the scope for analysis and interpretation lies. Visual analysis deals with how the visuals communicate, the meaning they generate, the effect they produce and the functions they serve. It can be applied to visual materials like art, photography, cinema, posters, sculpture, etc. Visual analysis can describe and analyse the visual material, situate its context, and interpret the content.
8.3 ICONOLOGY
The term iconology is derived from the Greek words ikon and logia, which mean image, reason, thought and discourse, respectively. Iconology evolved to study individual artworks or bodies of artworks with a specific focus on the subject matter or meaning of works. Iconology is a branch of art history that deals with the social, cultural, and historical background of the themes and subjects in visual arts. The leading proponent of iconology, Aby Warburg, stated that iconology's idea is to trace motifs to different cultures and visual forms and explore artworks through 'synthetic intuition', i.e., the basic drives of the human psyche. Iconology tries to unearth the psychology and the imprint of culture on creating artworks. Both material and mental images are considered, and

artwork is investigated as a product of time and place. It probes the following questions:
1. Who created the artwork/s? In the case of patronised work/s, who
commissioned the work and for what purpose?
2. Why were the particular artist chosen? Why at a specific location and
time?
3. Why was it represented in a certain manner?
4. What influences did the artist bring to his work/s--religious, social,
historical, ideological, and personal? German Professor Erwin Panofsky developed a method of analysing artworks known as iconography, which emphasises the description of the representation. Basically, iconography studies a particular range or system of images used by an individual artist or group of artists to convey particular meanings. For instance, the iconography of Amrita Shergil and Frida Kahlo as autobiographical works reflect the personalised experience of the artists as women. Panofsky identified three layers/strata of meaning in artworks - representational, iconographical, and iconological. He devised the following three-point system to apply to the works of art:
I. Primary/Natural level:
The first level, the pre-iconographic level, is about the natural subject matter. Here, we see what we get, i.e., we can identify only the basic subject matter of a painting. Here, we recognise the objects, gestures, activities, people, places, and things. At this level, we do not need any inside cultural, conventional or art historical knowledge to understand the artwork. Our practical daily life experience comes into play, and we identify the motifs used. We can understand only as much as someone from any other culture would understand. This level is subdivided into the factual and the expressional sections. II. Secondary/ Conventional level: In the second level, we look at a deeper level of meaning. The preliminary work of iconology begins here. We must know the cultural and artistic conventions in use to understand an artwork. Here, we go beyond recognising objects to identifying ideas, themes, and concepts through artistic motif/s. We have progressed to the first step of iconology in interpreting the artwork/s. This step is also referred to as iconographical symbolism. III. Tertiary level: The third level is the highest goal of iconology. We explore the intrinsic meaning or content. At this level, Panofsky says, we understand the underlying basic attitude of a nation, a period, a class, a religious or philosophical persuasion. Here, we look at the ideological meanings. Panofsky considers art a symptom of something else and expresses itself in countless other symptoms; therefore, the compositional and

Internet Research iconographic features are interpreted as particularised evidence of Methods-I something else. Symbolical values that artists consciously intended or even unaware of form the basis of iconology. This level is also referred to as iconological symbolism. For further understanding, see Table.1 (Panofsky's System) The iconographical study is most suitable for studying the artworks of the past. It entails observation, documentary research, intertextual comparison, and classification. Both textual and contextual research are conducted. As Theo Van Leeuven, in The Handbook of Visual Analysis, notes, iconographers will
1. Find out as much as possible about the circumstances under which the
objects of their studies were created.
2. Collect and verify all the available factual information.
3. Read books on theology and mythology to identify the subject matter
and
4. Observe the interplay between the influences of literary sources and the
effect of self-dependent. Table 1. Panofsky's System
Object of Act of Equipment for Controlling
Interpretation Interpretation Interpretation Principle of
Interpretation
1. Primary or natural Pre- Practical History of
subject matter - iconographical expression Style (Insight (A) factual, (B) description (familiarity with into how, expressional, (and pseudo- objects and under varying constituting the formal events) historical world of artistic analysis) conditions, motifs objects and events were expressed by forms.)
2. Secondary or Iconographical Knowledge of History of
conventional analysis literary sources Types (Insight subject matter, (familiar with into how, constituting the specific themes under varying world of images, and concepts) historical stories, and conditions, allegories specific themes or concepts were expressed by objects and events.)

3. Intrinsic meaning Iconological Synthetic History of
or content, interpretation intuition cultural constituting the (familiarity with symptoms or world of the essential symbols in 'symbolic' values tendencies of the general human mind), (Insight into conditioned by how, under personal varying psychology and historical 'Weltanschauung.' conditions, essential tendencies of the human mind were expressed by specific themes and concepts.)
8.4 FORMALISM
As its name suggests, a formal analysis analyses the form of the visual, i.e., the visual attributes, material attributes and composition. Figure, shape and delineation are of high significance. Formalism, an antithesis of iconography, is a methodology that prioritises "form" over "content." It focuses on the figure and plays in the form. Form constitutes all the elements that are used to express content. Both form and content are interrelated and, in a way, co-dependent and inseparable. However, Roger Fry, an artist and art critic who emerged as one of the most influential and leading formalist critics, stated that art has little or no meaningful connection with the artist or the cultural and historical context from which it emanated. He encapsulated art as a product of people's imagination and emphasised the emotional effects of artwork. In "An Essay in Aesthetics," Fry argues that the response felt from examining art comes from its form, meaning that the use of line, mass, colour, and overall design invokes an emotional response. His specific contribution was to perceive the elements that give an artist his significance. Fry's approach mainly relies on dissecting each element in the art and understanding its contribution to its overall impression. There is ample scope for a subjective view in interpreting the artwork/s. Basically, a formal analysis aims to study formal elements like line, colour, contrast, shape, and mass and how they are composed in various ways to create balance, proportion, and order as well as rhythm and pattern. It compares style and form and explores visual, spatial, material, and compositional aspects of artwork. Artwork as pure form, emancipated from the artist's intention and context, was the crux of formalist thought. However, later critics and scholars have contested the rigid distinctions of

Internet Research iconography and formalism and stressed the combination of the two Methods-I approaches to studying artworks. This mixed method has comprehensively accounted for the differences in style in various historic periods, cultures, artistic schools, and movements.
8.5 SIMULATION
Have you ever wondered why the images of products or celebrities we see are more impressive than the product or the celebrity? This is the power of image today. The images are nothing but copies. Yet, the copies seem more real than the original or more real than the real. The problem of representation doesn't arise here as in modernity, where the artist was troubled with representation, as there was this quest and curiosity to represent reality or truth. Now, in postmodernity, the signs are detached from reality. Copies fundamentally characterise them without the original or, at least, copies whose original doesn't exist anymore. Therefore, there is no distinction between the real and the unreal, and everything is a matter of simulation/simulacrum, and the significance of the original recedes. French philosopher Jean Baudrillard theorised about this phenomenon of simulacra and hyperreality. Baudrillard argued that this is not a question of imitation, duplication, or parody but that of substituting the real for the real. The realm of the hyperreal is more real than real. Examples are malls, virtual reality games, theme parks, Disneyland, TV sports, Instagram, film cities (Ramoji Film City), and other such simulations. Further, Baudrillard encapsulates hyperreality as "the meticulous reduplication of the real, preferably through another reproductive medium, such as photography." The hyperreal world's images, models and codes control our thoughts and behaviour. As explained in The Stanford Encyclopaedia, in this postmodern world, individuals flee from the "desert of the real" for the ecstasies of hyperreality and the new realm of computer, media, and technological experience. As simulations increase, they refer only to themselves: a carnival of mirrors reflecting images projected from other mirrors onto the omnipresent television and computer screen and the screen of consciousness. This refers to the image's previous storehouse of images produced by simulatory mirrors. Baudrillard, in his seminal essay, "The Precession of Simulacra," describes four successive phases of the image: * it is the reflection of a profound reality; * it masks and denatures a profound reality; * it masks the absence of a profound reality; * it has no relation to any reality whatsoever: it is its pure simulacrum Baudrillard summarises that the masses seek spectacle and not meaning.

8.6 SCOPE OF INQUIRY
Depending on the framework or objectives of the study, we can engage in different kinds of inquiries into visual arts/phenomena. The inquiries are derived from the six perspectives of visuals - personal, cultural, historical, technical, critical, and ethical. Here, we outline some of the inquiries:
8.6.1 Contextual Inquiry
Contextual inquiry aims at interpreting subject matter, describing function/s and identifying the cultural/historical significance of the visuals. Primarily, we try to explore what is shown and why. We try to understand the work by examining the historical context in which it is situated. We try to compare it with texts and other imagery from the time and go beyond the aesthetic purpose. The context can be ascertained through history and identifying types of work - portrait, tablet, tomb, worship place, and palace. The motivation of the artists and patrons can help them understand the purpose and appearance. The inquiry can be based on formal analysis (understanding the shared conventions of art in its historical iconography, context, function, style, art as a cultural artefact, visual experience, and critical thinking (with ideological frames of Feminism/Marxism/Pluralism...). This contextualisation helps to situate the work within a larger framework/background to identify its signification, significance, and impact at the time of its production.
8.6.2 Historical Inquiry
In historical inquiry, we are firstly concerned with the who, what, when, where and why of an image. In the case of patronised works, why and how it was commissioned/produced are also taken into consideration. Secondly, we try to locate and analyse historical resources to establish the historical evidence required to construct an interpretation of the work. We look at major events and developments (social, political, religious, etc) during the period and what caused them, how they influenced the artist's decision, how they shaped the artist's work and the meaning produced. It can probe the medium and techniques used by understanding their historical usage as certain mediums and techniques are integrally connected to specific periods, times, and purposes. It could be part of a cultural tradition.
8.6.3 Personal Language
This pertains to an artist's style, i.e., the visual language used or evolved by her/him - the choices made in composition, technique, medium, idea, theme, etc. Artists may work in a single medium or use multiple mediums within a specific genre, defy generic conventions, or hybridise on consistent themes or specific settings - historical or contemporary. The influences on the artist, the inspiration, upbringing, life and experience, beliefs and values, and technical skills could be valuable here. Some artists can evolve their stylistics. For instance, Dutch painter Rembrandt's use of lighting is referred to as Rembrandt lighting, Stanley Kubrick's use of one-point perspective, and Orson Welles' deep focus photography in films.

Internet Research [Image of Rembrandt's painting with Rembrandt Lighting, a still of one-point Methods-I perspective in Kubrick's The Shining, a still of Orson Welles Citizen Kane]
8.6.4 Reflexivity
Images often involve a high degree of reflexivity, with the artist reflecting on her/his positionality. Their perception of art or self itself is embodied in the work/s. Therefore, the inquiry is centred around the artist's interrogation of self and his/her preoccupation with art. Self-portraits, mirror reflections, illusion, and metapainting are a few practices in reflexivity. In photography, reflections, shadows, framing, irregular angles, posture, expression, and distortion are employed. Often, the audience is made aware of the work as an artificial construction. The inquiry focuses on the visual projection of self, the embedded narrative/s and the artist's self-awareness. Examples of self- reflexive practices - Bengali filmmaker Ritwik Ghatak's film Jukti Takko Aur Gappo (1975) on his status as a partition refugee in Bengal, Iranian Filmmaker Abbas Kiarostami's Koker Trilogy in which self-referencing is extensively used. Artists Frida Kahlo, Van Gogh and photographer Vivian Maier's self-portraits are good examples. Selfie as an art form can be studied under reflexivity.
8.6.5 Communities and Culture
Particular communities or cultures have traditions of producing certain kinds of art - ritual-based illustrations, performance, and spectacle. For example, totems, idols, and tribal/indigenous art. Worli art is a genealogical register of the Gond Tribes in Central India; the Theyyam dance in Kerala with intricate, colourful face painting for invoking ancestral spirit during worship, and mandala floor drawings of Nagamandala ritual of coastal Karnataka for worshipping snakes to mention a few community-based art forms. Another dimension that can be investigated is the relationship of an artist's work/s to particular cultures and communities. Robert Flaherty's documentary film Nanook of the North (1922) on the Nanook tribe, Maya Deren's Ritual in the Transfigured Time (1946) on Voodoo worship, and Vinod Raja's Bird Trapper or Beggar (2017) on nomadic Hakki Pikki community can be explored in this light.
8.6.6 Philosophy and Visuality
In this inquiry, we attend to the philosophical ideas behind the image. We are keen on mapping the search for the meaning of life that the artist is engaging in a work or series of works. It can be philosophies that led to art movements like impressionism, expressionism, surrealism, dadaism, etc. It can be the philosophical leanings of the artist, like feminism, Marxism, postmodernism, etc. It can also be religious philosophies like Buddhism, Judaism, Confucianism, etc. Each of these isms/philosophies has certain stylistic and formal elements. The inquiry can be conducted through the application of the frameworks of the philosophy as well as analysis of the formal and stylistic components of the work. Discourses on representation of race, caste, gender, class, etc. can also be discussed here.

8.6.7 Hybridisation
Visual Analysis
Hybridisation is blending two or more mediums/materials/genres to produce a visual work. Hybridisation is of various kinds - intermixing new/unusual materials with traditional mediums, crossing over aesthetic elements, fusion of genres, etc., to produce new effects. It can also be a hybrid of objects like paintings, drawings, and photographs, as in collages, between images and techniques through VFX. It can blur the distinctions between media, materials, art, and science. Hybrid products break away from rigid conventions and push the limitations and boundaries of art practice/s. Examples of hybrid works are body art, memes, parodies, remixes, and dub smash. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is visuality?

2. List three levels of iconography.

3. Define formalism.

4. Elaborate on simulation and hyperreality.

5. Differentiate denotation and connotation.

Internet Research 8.7 SITES AND MODALITIES
Methods-I In the book Visual Methodologies, Gillian Rose summarises, "interpretations of visual images broadly concur that there are three sites at which the meanings of an image are made: the site(s) of the production of an image, the site(s) of the image itself, and the site(s) where various audiences see it." He adds that each site(s) has three different aspects called modalities. The three modalities Rose suggests are:
1. Technological, where visual technology is defined as 'any form of
apparatus designed either to be looked at or to enhance natural vision', such as oil paintings, photography, television, and the Internet.
2. Compositional, where compositionality refers to the specific material
qualities of an image or visual object, i.e., the formal strategies like content, colour, and spatial organisation.
3. Social means a wide range of economic, social, and political relations,
institutions and practices that surround an image through which it is seen and used.
4. All these three modalities have a bearing on all three sites.
8.8 METHODS OF VISUAL ANALYSIS
8.8.1 Semiotics
We can all identify common signs around us--traffic signs, toilet signage, flags, emblems, etc. We have signs in schools, railway stations, malls, and almost every public space. All communication happens through signs only. Then, how do we understand sign/s? The sign is defined as something that stands for something other than itself. The meaning of the sign lies outside of it. Now, we wonder how the sign is connected to the meaning it represents. A sign's meaning can be understood through resemblance, as in a photograph, through causal relation, as in the case of smoke (the fire is the cause, smoke is the effect), and through learning, as in the case of language. Any entities like words, images, and objects are signs. Gestures, facial expressions, and body language are signs. Signs have material forms, i.e., can be seen, heard, touched, smelt, or tasted, but act as a link or vehicle to something immaterial. Swiss linguist Ferdinande de Saussure, while studying the structure of language, invented the term semiology to refer to the science of signs. Semiology was derived from the Greek root semeion, which means sign. This branch of science deals with what signs consist of and the laws that govern them. According to Saussure, semiology is the "life of signs. It looks at how the relationship between the sign and the 'something else' results. The society teaches us this relationship. Saussure developed a two-part sign model - A sign consists of a signifier and 130 a signified.

The signifier is the form the sign takes (which carries or produces meaning), and the signified is the concept or object it represents (the meaning itself). The relationship between the signifier and signified is called signification. Saussure identified the signifier as the sound image and the signified as the concept.
E.g.: T- R-E-E
Signifying practices refer to how rather than what meanings are produced. Saussure noted:
1. The relationship between signifier and signified is arbitrary.
2. The relationship is not intrinsic but relational; it is not necessary or
inevitable.
3. The relationship is differential, i.e., a system of differences and
oppositions exists. All of Saussure's discussions of signs were related to structural linguistics. Later, American scholar Charles Sanders Peirce proposed a three-part model in which the sign is divided into the sign or representation, the object to which it refers, and the interpretant to the meaning it conveys. A sign can have multiple signifieds/interpretants. This polysemy can lead to confusion or miscommunication as the intended meaning may not be received. Pierce's major contribution was in identifying images as signs. He divided signs into types based on the relationship between the signifier and the signified. Three of these have been widely accepted - icon, index, and symbol.
1. An icon shares a relationship of similarity/resemblance. A photograph, a
statue, or a portrait are icons as they resemble the person or place, they depict. This resemblance can be identified through seeing.
2. An index has a relationship of connection, so it points to what it stands
for either through causal relationship or contiguity. This can be figured out. Fire and smoke share a causal relationship; therefore, smoke is an indexical sign.
3. A symbol has a relationship of arbitrariness. A symbol's meaning can be
understood through learning its conventions. The National Flag is a symbol. The country the flag represents is identified by learning about it. Alphabets, words, and language are all symbols. Visuals can be iconical, indexical or symbolical. American scholar Charles Morris developed the behavioural theory of signs. He claimed that signs have three types of relations: 1. to objects, 2. to persons, and 3. to other symbols. Correspondingly, his semiotics has three branches: semantics, syntactics, and pragmatics. Semantics inquiries into the relationship of signs to what they stand for, Syntactics (or syntax) examines the formal or structural relations between signs, and pragmatics investigates the relationship of signs to interpreters.

Internet Research Visual Semiotics
Methods-I When studying visuals in semiotics, we have to consider two aspects-- denotation and connotation, referred to as two-order signification. French scholar Roland Barthes developed the theory of two-order signification, where any sign has multiple signifieds / layered meanings. Apart from the general meanings, there can be cultural meanings attached to a sign. A sign has two sets of meanings - a) First-order meaning is literal, apparent, and manifest. This is the common-sense meaning. This is denotation. b) The second order means latent and hidden. This is the ideological meaning. This is connotation. Denotation addresses representation, and connotation addresses the 'hidden meanings' of images. Barthesian semiotics and Panofsky's three-point system are concerned with the meaning of the visual/artwork. The denotation is akin to the primary level in that we only identify the people, places, and objects as they were in the image. The connotation is the amalgamation of the secondary and tertiary levels, locating cultural and ideological meanings. The only difference is the consideration of the context in the iconographic method.
8.8.2 Content Analysis
Content analysis is a research method used to identify patterns in a set of texts, which can be written, oral, or visual. It is mostly used as a quantitative method, but at times it involves coding and numerical values. Here, when we use the term text, we mean any object whose meaning and significance you want to interpret in depth. These objects are not necessarily written and spoken. They can be paintings, films, visual artefacts, etc. Content analysis can be conducted on a set of images, generally many images. The data is systematically collected from the set of visual texts chosen as the sample. Content analysis can handle large quantities of data. Typically, they try to work based on a formulated, more specifically, a comparative hypothesis. For example, Lipstick advertisements are red. The method allows the description of one or more defined areas of representation, periods, or types of images. It can be applied to formal elements like shape, size, position, colour, etc. It can be applied to representation in movies, television, etc., or any object whose meaning and significance you want to interpret in depth. Each text, whether verbal or visual, is called text. The units of analysis (of manifest content) must be clear, reliable, observable, and defined logically to allow quantification. Then, under each unit of analysis, specific and relevant categories have to be devised. It is necessary to ensure that each of the categories is built from within the set of the unit, i.e., it should be the dimensions or qualities of the particular unit of analysis alone. Each of the units has to be mutually exclusive and exhaustive. For 132 example, in a study about photography, shots can be a unit, angle can be a

unit, orientation can be a unit, etc. Under each of these units, we can have categories like close-up, mid-shot, and long shot for shots and high, low, and irregular for angle, and portrait and landscape for orientation. The coding can be done based on the categories. Leeuven writes the typical research questions which may be addressed using content analysis, including:
1. Questions of priority/salience of media content: How visible (how
frequently, how large, and in what order in a programme) are different kinds of images, stories, and events represented? ...
2. Questions of 'bias': comparative questions about the duration,
frequency, priority, or salience of representations of, say, political personalities, issues, policies, or of 'positive' versus 'negative' features of representation.
3. Historical changes in modes of representation of, for example, gender,
occupation, class, or ethically codified images in particular types of publications or television genres. Steps in Content Analysis:
1. Select the texts to analyse - Choose the medium, the genre, the artist, the
period to be focused on, and any inclusion/exclusion criteria. Collect the determined sample.
2. Define the units of analysis and categories.
3. Set the coding rules.
4. Apply the rule and do the coding.
5. Analyse the results.
6. Conclude.
8.8.3 Discourse Analysis
Michel Foucault's monograph Archaeology of Knowledge (1972) inspired an entire method/body of research called discourse analysis. Discourse analysis emphasises language in use, institutions, and social practices, particularly drawing insights from Foucault's theories on power, knowledge, and discourse--the production and maintenance of knowledge and unequal power relations. Originally applied to written and spoken language, discourse analysis is now applied to any sign language, hence its application in visual arts and media. Discourse analysis is not concerned with the structural aspects of a text. Rather, it explores the relations of power and knowledge construction in terms of works of art and the institutions that produce them. In Visual Methodologies, Gillian Rose defines discourse as groups of statements that structure how we think, and act based on that thinking. In other words, discourse is a particular knowledge about the world that shapes how the world is understood and how things are done. Therefore, Rose notes that `art' does not consist of certain kinds of visual images but of knowledge, 133

Internet Research institutions, subjects, and practices that define certain images as art and Methods-I others as not art. As such, the method is complex and vague, as no clear steps are specified. Researchers evolve their own system and apply it. Broadly, Foucault's concepts of enonciation (enunciation), the practice of uttering something in a context, and enonce (statement), the basic unit of discourse, can be applied to the study. Enunciation, the practice of uttering, is a communication practice. Hence, various forms of communication, including visual communication, are brought under the ambit of discourse analysis. Ways of communication, strategies, signs, technologies, and visualisation can be studied under discourse analysis. The world or society that the visual arts create and the persuasion they engage in can be explored as a discourse. Visuality, as a discourse that renders certain things visible and invisibilises others, can be examined. Further, the institutions that produce these images and their power in constructing the world can be investigated. In all of these, the images themselves are the argument. The researcher's task is deciphering the constructed visibilities and how they constitute power/knowledge. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain Morris' branches of semiotics.

2. Specify the steps involved in content analysis.

3. Elucidate the basic steps of discourse analysis.

4. Identify the types of inquiry in visual analysis.

5. Discuss the three modalities in visual research.

8.9 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we have discussed the intricate realm of visual analysis, a meticulous process that involves dissecting visual material to understand its context and interpret its content. We have explored Panofsky's three-point system, which categorises artwork subject matter into primary, secondary, and tertiary elements, offering a structured approach to study. Also, this Unit explained formal analysis, such as line, colour, and shape, discerning how they merge to establish balance, proportion, and order within compositions. In the complexities of postmodernity, we discussed the blurring boundaries between the real and the unreal, where simulation and simulacra reign supreme. Understanding the multifaceted meanings embedded within images, we explored three critical sites: production, the image itself, and its audience, each imbued with technological, compositional, and social modalities. Furthermore, in this Unit, we discussed the concepts of denotation and connotation, indispensable tools of semiotics, and distinguishing between literal and manifest meanings versus hidden and latent interpretations. Finally, we discussed the intricacies of content analysis, a methodological approach to identifying patterns across various textual forms, be it written, oral, or visual, and delve into the concept of discourses, the underlying structures shaping our perceptions and actions.
8.10 KEYWORDS
Iconology : The study of the subject matter of artwork. Formalism : The study of formal elements of an artwork Motif : An element in a composition that can be used repeatedly for decorative, structural, or iconographic purposes. It can have symbolic meanings. Style : is a coherence of qualities in periods or people-- consistency in things like medium, function and subject matter. Style varies in time and place, so much like medium and technique. Dominant Reading : Closer to the preferred/intended meaning of encoder/producer. Negotiated Reading : Partial acceptance, partial rejection of preferred meaning. Oppositional Reading : Rejection of the preferred meanings

Internet Research Semantics : A branch of semiotics that studies the meaning/s of Methods-I signs. Syntactics : A branch of semiotics that studies the syntax/structure of signs. Pragmatics : A branch of semiotics that studies the relation of signs to interpreters.
8.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Chandler, Daniel (2022). Semiotics; The Basics. London: Routledge
2. Berger, Arthur Asa (2016). Media Analysis Techniques (4th Edition).
New Delhi: Sage
3. Leeuven, Theo Van and Jewitt, Carl (2000). The Handbook of Visual
Analysis. London: Sage
4. Nayar, Pramod K. (2008). Introduction to Cultural Studies. New Delhi:
Viva Books
5. Rose, Gillian (2003). Visual Methodologies: An Introduction to
Researching the Visual Materials (4th Edition). London: Sage
8.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Visuality refers to the study and interpretation of visual culture,
encompassing the analysis of images, symbols, and visual representations across various media forms. It examines how visual elements communicate meaning, influence perception, and shape cultural identity, offering insights into the visual aspects of human expression and communication.
2. Iconography operates on three levels: primary, secondary, and tertiary.
Primary iconography involves identifying and interpreting the primary subject matter or central themes depicted in an image. Secondary iconography delves deeper into the symbolism and allegorical meanings associated with specific visual elements. Tertiary iconography explores broader cultural, historical, and contextual interpretations.
3. Formalism is an analytical approach in art and cultural studies that
focuses on the formal qualities of artworks, such as composition, colour, line, and texture, rather than their socio-political or historical context. It emphasizes the intrinsic aesthetic properties of art objects and their impact on viewers' perceptions and experiences.
4. Simulation refers to the imitation or replication of real-world phenomena
through artificial means, often blurring the boundaries between reality and representation. Hyperreality, coined by Jean Baudrillard, describes a condition where simulations become more real or meaningful than reality itself, leading to a state of heightened artificiality and loss of distinction

between the two.
5. Denotation refers to the literal or explicit meaning of a sign or symbol,
representing its surface-level definition or objective representation. Connotation, on the other hand, involves the subjective, cultural, or contextual associations and interpretations associated with a sign, going beyond its literal meaning to convey layers of symbolic significance and cultural connotations. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Morris' semiotic theory encompasses three branches: syntactics,
semantics, and pragmatics. Syntactics studies the formal relations between signs, focusing on their arrangement and structure. Semantics examines the meaning of signs and their relationship to the objects they represent. Pragmatics investigates how signs function in communication within specific contexts.
2. Content analysis involves systematically analysing textual, visual, or
audio content to identify patterns and themes. The process typically includes selecting the content to be analysed, defining coding categories, coding the content according to these categories, and analysing the coded data to draw conclusions and insights. Finally, researchers interpret the findings within the context of their research objectives.
3. Discourse analysis involves examining language use in communication
to uncover underlying meanings and social constructs. The process includes selecting the discourse to be analysed, transcribing, or recording the discourse, identifying linguistic features and patterns, interpreting these features within their social and cultural context, and drawing conclusions about power dynamics, identity construction, and discourse structures.
4. Visual analysis encompasses various types of inquiry, including
iconography, iconology, and visual culture analysis. Iconography focuses on identifying and interpreting visual symbols and motifs within artworks. Iconology delves deeper, exploring the underlying meanings and cultural contexts of these symbols. Visual culture analysis examines broader societal meanings and interpretations of visual artifacts.
5. Visual research employs three modalities: production, documentation,
and analysis. Production involves creating visual artifacts, such as photographs, videos, or artworks. Documentation entails capturing visual data through methods like photography or video recording. Analysis entails interpreting visual data to extract meaningful insights, often using techniques such as semiotics, discourse analysis, or content analysis.

In ternet Research
UNIT 9 SOCIAL MEDIA ANALYSIS
Methods-I Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Social Network and Social Network Analysis
9.2.1 Social Network:
9.2.2 Network Analysis:
9.2.3 Social Media Analysis:
9.3 Concepts of Data and Data Management
9.3.1 Data
9.3.2 Data Collection
9.3.3 Data Management
9.3.4 Data Storage
9.3.5 Data Privacy and Security
9.3.6 Data Cleaning
9.3.7 Data Governance
9.3.8 Data Analysis and Insights
9.3.9 Data Reporting
9.4 Cohesion, Centralisation, Decentralisation
9.5 Social Capital, Structural Holes, Equivalence
9.6 Block Models, Ego Models and Building Network Models
9.7 Social Network Theoretical Concepts - Social Capital (structural holes
versus Simmelian ties), diffusion, small world, reciprocity, social support
9.8 Network Theories in Cultural Anthropology
9.9 Let Us Sum Up
9.10 Keywords
9.11 Further Readings
9.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
This Unit is concerned with acquainting the learners with some important concepts related to social networks and their analysis. The nature and scope of social media and the social capital that works in the networks will be discussed to deliver the ideas of Social Media Analysis. It would also lead to understanding social cohesion, diffusion of information, and social capital, as well as managing and analysing the data, which is of great value in the modern world. Again, to get a proper overview of the subject matter, we can understand the definitions, thereby grasping that technology, psychology and marketing are 138 intertwined. Social networks have become the key to understanding human

psychology in technological intervention. This psychology and behaviour are Analysis the core elements of social capital. The shifting interest of sociologists and anthropologists in the different nodes and connecting social media links can be an effective area for understanding human behaviour. Hence, social network analysis is crucial for study and central to modern communication.
9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Identify the concepts and objectives of studying social network analysis; * Discuss the subject matter, nature, and scope of data management; * Discuss the key elements and factors that network; * Understand the concepts of social cohesion, centralisation; * Explain the workings of network models; and * Describe the theoretical concepts of social networks.
9.2 SOCIAL NETWORK AND SOCIAL
NETWORK ANALYSIS
Social Media is today the place where all the action is taking place. Thus, social media is an evolution of word of mouth that has been upped with technology's intervention and the complex web's presence. The major components of social media span are 1) Social Networking, 2) Microblogs, 3) Blogs, 4) RSS Feeds, 5) Widgets, 6) Linking and posting, 7) Content Rating,
8) Bookmarking sites, 9) Audio podcasting, 10) Video podcasting. Social
media and Social networks are two sides of the same coin. Social networks, also called social networking services, have become the most crucial element of the new world, dominated by new media, social media, and the web of networks. Today, a world highly connected by the Internet has social media as the core communication element. In this case, a deeper understanding of social networks is crucial and fundamental for any behavioural-related study.
9.2.1 Social Network
The element of connecting through social media is what social networks are, and it has changed the entire phizog of human connectivity. The Internet was taken by storm with the advent of blogging, and at the same time, wikis brought easy information home to the world. However, social media created a platform for users to develop their profiles containing basic information, inviting others to register and liaise with profiles of the people they knew or were keen on developing links with. The system created platforms for people with shared interests to connect easily and access information through other profiles. From information base like Wikipedia to connecting for professional linkups like LinkedIn, to sharing political and non-political opinions through Facebook and X (formerly Twitter) and creating a base for photographs through Flickr or Instagram or even uploading videographic content through YouTube, social networks developed new vistas. They created a complex network that needed analysis, even from a capitalist perspective. A social

Internet Research network is based on a Sociological perspective, similarities in liking, and Methods-I overlapping interests, among others.
9.2.2 Network analysis
Network analysis deals with simplifying social structures, formulating patterns and developing models that determine common properties of the networks and acceptable methods that can be used to analyse networks in general. The concepts and methods of network analysis can be coordinated through graphs and models. These fall under the statistical and probabilistic methods and, to a lesser extent, algebraic techniques. These broad concepts, such as social roles or social groups, are moulded into formal models of networks that can become the base of academic or behavioural studies. Network analysis also has a considerable amount of relevance outside the theoretical perspective. The relationship between nodes is a major unit of analysis in social network studies (i.e., the links among individuals, groups, or other objects). Social network analysis requires data on the ties among entities (i.e., the links among the nodes), which could be friendship, co-membership, communication, and shared behaviour.
9.2.3 Social Media Analysis
Social media analysis is an emerging area that is largely the by-product of connectivity and interactive tools and sites. They are the core of studying issues about lifestyles and activities in the digital realms capable of; there is so much misinformation, fragmentation, and confusion within the marketplace today that it is tough to know how to choose the right platforms and how to set up the right processes to achieve our goals. Social Media Analytics is for anyone who seeks the right technologies to implement social listening and measurement programs. As a larger part of our lives has become ruled by social media, we need to know what these platforms are capable of and how to use them effectively to achieve our goals. Social Network Analysis is thus a different approach to social phenomena, requiring new concepts and methods for data collection and analysis. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Elaborate with details about social media analysis.

9.3 CONCEPTS OF DATA AND DATA
Analysis
MANAGEMENT
9.3.1 Data
Data is the modern-day currency. Data is information, and all the information available on the web of social networks is the currency of information gold that can be used to understand human behaviour. This could be both sociologically relevant and a useful base for consumer-based companies.
9.3.2 Data Collection
There are different kinds of data: one extracted by companies or social forums from the users of the profile holders on social media and one that is user-generated content. Much user-generated content includes posts, comments, images, and videos. Personal details, demographics, and preferences provided by users when creating profiles are crucial data readily available online. For a data collector, working with spreadsheet programs could be a tedious task, and filtering and manipulating data are becoming core requirements for some jobs.
9.3.3 Data Management
Managing the information available online is one of the primary determinants of data analysis. Data management in social media refers to the strategies, processes, and practices crucial for managing and systematising the vast amount of data generated through social media platforms. A major determinant of effective data management is maintaining the privacy and security of user information, checking data accuracy, and extracting meaningful insights for business or research purposes.
9.3.4 Data Storage
With data in abundance, there is a significant need for the hour to work for efficient storage and retrieval mechanisms that look at both structured and unstructured data. There are different means to store data. Cloud Storage: Many social media platforms leverage cloud infrastructure for scalable and flexible storage solutions.
9.3.5 Data Privacy and Security
With great data comes great responsibility for working on its security. Privacy policies are crucial and significant, with threats targeted at vulnerable sectors. Most policies work on implementing encryption, access controls, and other security measures from unauthorised access or breaches.
9.3.6 Data Cleaning
A systematic review and cleaning of datasets to eliminate errors, duplicacies, or outdated information is crucial for smooth working. This requires validating that the data collected is accurate and reliable.

Internet Research 9.3.7 Data Governance
Methods-I Adhering to data protection regulations and industry standards through establishing and enforcing internal data management and usage policies.
9.3.8 Data Analysis and Insights
Perhaps social media analysis emanates from analysing the existing data with the help of analytics tools. Employing tools and techniques to analyse social media data and derive meaningful insights are the core elements of Social media analysis. In the age of Artificial Intelligence algorithms to predict trends, sentiment, and user behaviour based on social media data. This is the most important part of the entire data-management process.
9.3.9 Data Reporting
Data reporting can mean a lot of things. Most significantly, how the correlations are significant and the applicable trends. Prompt data analysis requires marketing and technical skills to know what the numbers mean, and which are important. The marketing analytics process leads to suggestions for enhancement, planning new programs, and developing new budgets that are more sustainable to the market demands. Understanding the social media equation is crucial in a market-driven world where stringent marketing programs must allow marketing managers to update their case to the market's demands, leading to a decent sales pitch. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is Data management? Discuss how Data is analysed.

1. Discuss how the audiences can be reached with the help of Data analysis.

9.4 COHESION, CENTRALISATION, CORE-
PERIPHERY
Let us understand three core concepts: Social Cohesion: Social cohesion can be defined as the element of

connectedness and commonality among groups in society. It concentrates Analysis primarily on two elements: the sense of belonging to a community and the relationships among members within the community itself. Social cohesion consolidates plurality of citizenship by minimising dissimilarity, socio- economic disparities, and fractures in society, bringing in the necessity of people's needs seeking personal development and a sense of belonging. Centralisation: A centralised network architecture is developed around a single server that handles all the major processing and controls the logistics, data, and major decisions through an established central authority or company processes. Some moderately powerful workstations or smaller tech groups connect to the main server and submit their requests rather than working independently on the available data. This can include applications, data storage, and utilities. Centralised networks do have their limitations, too. For example, a single point of failure can be a big risk factor for organisations. The centralisation of social media can be compromised in terms of censorship and integrity of content created by users. Examples of centralised social media are Facebook, Instagram, and LinkedIn. Decentralisation: Decentralised social networks operate on independently run servers rather than on a centralised server without the role of business ownership, and here, no single authority holds the data. Rather, it is decentralised over connection nodes among the networks. This, in turn, creates room. Despite the advantages of decentralised social media networks, there are apparent possibilities of attacks orchestrated by content creator communities that could lead to a large extent of loss of information. Mastodon is an example of such a decentralised network, free and open- source software for running self-hosted social networking services. It uses free, open-source program code. Another good example is Steem, which provides a social blockchain. Steem is a growing social blockchain community that provides room for revenue streams that are possible for users. It works in gratification mode by rewarding for their content.
9.5 SOCIAL CAPITAL, STRUCTURAL HOLES,
EQUIVALENCE
Social capital refers to the resources and advantages individuals or groups can access through social networks and relationships. It encompasses trust, cooperation, and shared values within a community or social group. Social capital is valuable because it facilitates collaboration, information exchange, and collective action. There are two main types of social capital: Bonding Social Capital: The connections and relationships within a close- knit group of people sharing similar characteristics, such as family, friends, or members of a particular community, are essentially bonding. This creates a deeper sense of relationships while making available support within the group.

Internet Research Bridging Social Capital: Social groups or individuals with various Methods-I backgrounds exist on social media. Bridging social capital refers to where connections are built, fostering interaction and cooperation across different communities, leading to a more all-encompassing and diverse network. Social capital can foster different changes in society. For instance, it can help aid: Economic Opportunities: A strong and diverse social network can give individuals access to job opportunities, information about potential careers, and business connections. Health and Well-being: Many supportive social networks work as a support system providing emotional and mental assistance. Social capital refers to this element that works for prospered mental and physical health. Community Development: A community is essential for human sustenance. It fosters collaboration, reliance, and collective values, crucial in community development. Social capital here leads to greater civic engagement and collective problem-solving. Education: In a highly networked world, education cannot be carried on without any support; social capital can enhance educational outcomes with easy access to resources, information, and accommodating networks that lead to academic upliftment. Social capital has been widely studied in sociology, economics, and political science to understand its implications for social dynamics and human behaviour. Check Your Progress: 3 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is social capital, and what are the different elements of social
capital?

2. What is Centralisation and decentralisation of technology? Define with
examples.

9.6 BLOCK MODELS, EGO MODELS, AND
Analysis
BUILDING NETWORK MODELS
The network that works today is simplistically divided into different models. These models are:
Block Models
In graph theory or network analysis, the process of simplifying a complex network, a "block model", could refer to simplifying by grouping nodes into blocks based on certain characteristics or properties. This can make it easier to analyse large networks.
Ego Networks
In social network analysis, an "ego network" refers to the connections closely connected to an individual node (ego). It includes the ego (central node) and its immediate connections (alters) and provides an in-depth analysis of a social network's local structure.
Building Network Models
This term could be related to constructing models for various types of networks, such as social networks, biological networks, or communication networks. Building network models often involves defining nodes, edges, and the rules or properties that govern their interactions. Tools that can help one estimate the social capital: Tools used to determine social capital Google Webmaster Tools- shows how often impressions of site pages and keywords are displayed. Brandwatch, Radian6, and Sysomos sort online messages about a brand or a target subject on social media channels such as X (formerly Twitter), Facebook, and MySpace. Four Square -targeting audience by location is performed. Web Watch -monitors the integrity and availability of your site from outside by simulating the end-user actions Check Your Progress: 4 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you mean by ego networks?

Internet Research 2. What do you mean by diffusion and small world in social media? Methods-I

9.7 NETWORK THEORIES IN CULTURAL
ANTHROPOLOGY
Social anthropologist John A. Barnes 1954 first coined the term social network, which has been used to study several areas broadly specified under anthropological studies. Cognitive anthropologists are also keenly interested in correlating social network perspectives with sociological behaviour. To begin with, we can examine the effects of certain social network positions on individual perceptions. Anthropological research or in-depth study could consider family connections among members, cordial friendship ties among individuals, alliances that hold together different tribes, and socio-economic exchange among communities. This, of course, considers material gifts as well. Considering the huge shifting of relations and networks to the social media level, many anthropologists have found that the prescribed network approach to exploratory social communication is a rich and effective fieldwork for ethnographic fieldwork. Anthropologists now determine human behaviour and cultural preservation through the classical method of producing and consuming media in modern society. Indeed, social networks also play important roles in theories of social control (Hirschi, 1969), social disorganisation and collective efficacy.
9.8 SOCIAL MEDIA DATA ANALYSIS
In this section, you will learn the seemingly abstract idea of "social media analysis" in a very easy and user-friendly manner. This will help you understand the concept of social media research in communication studies. Social media, unarguably, is referred to as "people's media". We are all witnesses to the users' instant reactions to some national issues on Facebook, WhatsApp, X (formerly Twitter), YouTube, Instagram, Snapchat, SMS, etc. A few mainstream media have started devoting special space or airtime to showcase a select few posts or comments from social media. Mass media traditionally was cut off from public feedback, but social media proved to be a game changer. Hence, systematic, scientific, and machine-enabled research is the need of the hour. For the benefit of understanding, this section has been divided into the analysis of Facebook, YouTube, and X (formerly Twitter) data. A paragraph on "social network analysis", a slightly different branch of social media research, has also been included to showcase the different colours of the DMRMs. As per Toronto Metropolitan University's Social Media Research Tool Kit, the following tools can be used to extract publicly available data from different social media account.

Analysis
Name Description Platforms Pricing
Gephi Gephi is the leading N/A (Must Free visualization and import datasets) exploration software for all kinds of graphs and networks. Gephi is open- source and free.
Hootsuite Social Media Marketing various Pay
& Management Dashboard
NodeXL NodeXL is a network Flickr, X, Freemium
analysis and visualization YouTube, software package for Wikipedia Microsoft Excel. Brandwatch / Get deep insights into various Pay Crimson Hexagon consumer opinion on any topic from across the social web. CrowdTangle A tool from Facebook to Facebook, Apply help follow, analyse, and Instagram report on what's happening across social media.
Netlytic Netlytic is a cloud-based YouTube, RSS Freemium
text and social networks Feeds, Google analyser that can Sheet, text/csv automatically summarize file and discover social networks from online conversations on social media sites. Hoaxy Visualizes the spread of X (via X's paid Freemium information using the API) Twitter Search API (from the last 7 days) Talkwalker A social media analytics various Pay and monitoring tool that keeps track of all brand- related online, print, and TV/radio content with real-time social listening and AI-driven consumer intelligence

Digmind Social media analytics for various Pay Methods-I businesses, and the
Influencer Network, a
dynamic and interactive portal that lets you identify and analyse your brand's top influencers and strongest communities on Twitter. Facepager Facepager was designed X, YouTube, Free for fetching public Websites available data from Twitter and other JSON- based API. Octoparse A no-coding web scraping various Freemium tool; offers web scraping templates that can extract post and user data snscrape Social media scraping tool various Free
Audiense Identify relevant Facebook, Freemium
audiences, discover Instagram, X amazing actionable insights and inform your strategies to grow your business.
Youtube-dl This is a command-line YouTube, Free
program to download supported video videos from sites YouTube.com and a few more sites.
DiscoverText DiscoverText is a cloud- Twitter, Freemium
based, SurveyMonkey, collaborative text Text files analytics solution. With dozens of powerful text mining features, the DiscoverText software _x0003_solution provides tools to quickly and accurately make better decisions.
Webometric Webometric Analyst is a X, YouTube, Free
Analyst Windows-based program Tumblr, for altmetrics, citation Goodreads, analysis, social web Flickr, analysis and webometrics, Mendeley, including link analysis. Altmetric,

Google Books, Analysis
WorldCat. TGStat This website allows users Telegram Free to search for Telegram channels and examine general Channel analytics.
Twitter Advanced Twitter Advanced search Twitter Free
Search using key words, phrases and hashtags.
YouTube Data This is a collection of YouTube Free
Tools simple tools for extracting data from the YouTube platform via the YouTube API v3. Media Cloud An open source and open news coverage Free data platform for storing, retrieving, visualizing, and analysing online news that collects data through RSS feeds. Users can download the collected data as a CSV. Tweet Archivist Tweet Archivist collects Twitter (via file Pay data directly from Twitter upload) based on the user's search terms. The user can also use this tool analyse the data to show information such as top users, words, URLs, hashtags, and more. Finally, users can download the dataset as either an Excel or PDF file.
Social Feed Social Feed Manager is Tumblr, Flickr, Free
Manager open source software for Sina Weibo libraries, archives, (latest update: cultural heritage 2021) institutions and research organizations. It empowers those communities' researchers, faculty, students, and archivists to define and create collections of data from social media platforms. Social Feed Manager will harvest

from Twitter, Tumblr, Methods-I
Flickr, and Sina Weibo
and is extensible for other platforms. In addition to collecting data from those platforms' APIs, it will collect linked web pages and media. Sentiment Viz Reddit visualisation app Reddit Free (sentiment, topics, heatmap, timeline, etc)
Instaloader Captures images/videos Instagram Free
and related metadata from Instagram
OutWit Hub OutWit Hub explores the Internet Freemium
depths of the Web for you, automatically collecting and organizing data and media from online sources. 4plebs This is a community-run 4chan Free archive of 4chan.org (since April of 2013) InVID verification The provided tools allow various Free plugin you to quickly get contextual information on
Facebook and YouTube
videos, to perform reverse image search on Google, Baidu or Yandex search engines, to fragment videos from various platforms (Facebook,
Instagram, YouTube,
Twitter, Daily Motion)
into keyframes, to enhance and explore keyframes and images through a magnifying lens, to query Twitter more efficiently through time intervals and many other filters, to read video and image metadata, to check the video copyrights, and to apply forensic filters on still images.

Social Searcher Social media monitoring various Freemium Analysis (users, hashtags, terms)
InfraNodus InfraNodus represents X, Amazon Pay
(formerly textual data as a network. Reviews, Textexture) It uses a combination of Google Search text mining, network Results analysis, data visualization, NLP, and artificial intelligence to provide insights about any discourse and enhance a research process. PhantomBuster Mainly for marketers, this LinkedIn, Freemium is a tool that can extract Instagram social media account details for leads and build campaigns
Telegram Search Telegram Telegram Free
Analytics (tgstat) messages Vtracker Tool for monitoring social various Pay media 4CAT (Capture A Python-based tool that Telegram, Free and Analysis captures and processes Reddit, Tumblr, Toolkit) data across different X, 4chan, 8kun, platforms; data can be BitChute; via downloaded for further Zeeschuimer: analysis Instagram, TikTok, 9gag, Imgur, LinkedIn,
Parler, Douyin
and X
Visibrain Focus Visibrain is a media various Pay monitoring tool for PR and communications professionals, used for reputation management, PR crisis prevention, and detecting influencers and trends. Visibrain's unique techxlogy brings together online press, blogs and social media, capturing all online activity around a brand, in real time.

Pulsar Social Pulsar helps you find the various Pay Methods-I story in the data by bringing all your digital audiences into one place and leveraging the power of AI and data visualization
Communalytic Communalytic is a Reddit, Freemium
Research Tool For Telegram,
Studying Online YouTube, X
Discourse. Communalytic (via X paid can collect, analyse and API), visualize data from CrowdTangle various social media (Facebook & platforms and can Instagram), automatically identify CSV and JSON toxic and anti-social interactions, map shared interests and detect signs of possible coordination among seemingly disparate actors in online discourse. ArchiveSocial ArchiveSocial various Pay automatically archives original social media posts as well as comments made by other users, allowing archive viewers to expand posts, comments, and pictures. The archive mirrors the original post, and has been used by agencies to comply with FOI requests and data archiving software-related research. Twitter Audit A tool used to check how X Freemium many of your Twitter followers are real. SteamID The website can look up Steam Freemium steam profiles, historic profiles or game information Affinio Affinio is the marketing various Pay intelligence platform that is changing the way you relate to your consumers.

Dash Hudson A social media various Pay Analysis management tool that offers social listening, audience insights and trends reporting Disboard Live updates of users Discord Free active in a given Discord community; reviews communities based on Discord user preferences Meltwater Social Offering a comprehensive various Pay (Sysomos) set of solutions that support the full spectrum of your advanced social analytics and management needs. PSNprofiles The website can search PlayStation Free publicly viewable players, Network daily gameplay activity, country and other stats Who posted what? Whopostedwhat.com is a Facebook Free non-public Facebook keyword search for people who work in the public interest. KarmaDecay Reverse image search of Reddit Free Reddit (beta)
Facebook Video Downloads Facebook Facebook Free
Downloader videos
Story Saver Download Instagram Instagram Free
Stories, Highlights and
Videos Online Easily with one simple click. Open Measures Analyse & visualize Gab, Parler, Free (formerly, Social harmful online trends 4chan, 8kun, Media Analysis such as hate, mis-, and Telegram, Toolkit or SMAT) disinformation online Gettr, Win Communities,
Poal, Rumble,
etc
Facebook Video Download Facebook Facebook Free
Downloader Videos Online

Skopenow Collecting and analysing various Pay Methods-I publicly available information from data sources including social media, the dark web, associated vehicles, court records, and contact data; Link Analysis feature generates a network and other visuals Telemetr.io The website provides Telegram Freemium Telegram channel analytics
Youtube Geofind YouTube Geofind; three YouTube Free
different search functions, location, topic, and channel. Twitter Video Download twitter videos X Free Downloader & GIF from tweets tlgrm.eu/channels This website allows users Telegram Free to search for Telegram channels
Redective Searches for profile and Reddit Free
engagement information of a Reddit user TelegramDB Telegram channel search Telegram Free engine
Geogramint Locates Telegram users Telegram Free
and groups based on geographic location (only users opted into the nearby feature) Telepathy The tool is described as Telegram Free the "Swiss army knife of Telegram tools," allowing analysts and researchers to archive Telegram chats (including replies, media content, comments and reactions), gather member lists, lookup users by given location, analyse top posters in a chat, map forwarded messages, and more.

metatargetr The goal of metatargetr is Facebook Free Analysis to parse targeting information from the
Meta Ad Targeting
dataset as well as retrieve data from the Audience tab in the Meta Ad Library.
TikTokApi 6.2.0 Unofficial TikTok API in TikTok Free
python that can retrieve video, hashtag, user data Source: https://socialmedialab.ca/apps/social-media-research-toolkit-2/
9.8.1 Facebook Data Analysis
If it were the nation, Facebook would have been the biggest one on earth. It comprises personalised Facebook pages, posts, likes, comments, photos, and videos. The researchers can harvest this rich data for insights. The biggest issues in social media data harvesting pertain to digital skills, i.e. technical knowledge, price issues, limitations of the free wares, multidimensional data treatment, etc. We would scrape the data from the posts here by taking Mr Bean's Facebook ID (among the world's top commented ones) at https://www.facebook.com/MrBean. A freeware from www.facepager.software.informer.com/3.5/ needs to be downloaded. After installing the face page, click the "new database" as shown in the arrow. Then click Add Nodes. Copy the ID from the Facebook page, e.g.

Internet Research www.facebook.com/Mr.Bean. Here, Mr. Bean is the ID. Insert it in the node Methods-I as shown below. Multiple IDs can be inserted at once, one ID per line. Now go to the source and select the <user>/posts. Afterwards, you can get the access token from the Facebook page by logging in to your account. Access tokens are security identifiers from your side, and social networking sites are quite careful about who uses their data. There is a limit to the posts or data that can be retrieved in 24 hours, but even this much data is sufficient for a good study. Assuming that the access token is obtained and entered as shown. Then click "fetch data", and the posts will be retrieved. When the node is expanded downwards, the data is visible, as shown. Once sufficient data is collected, select it by Shift + click and then click "export data". The data would be exported to CSV format and then converted into Excel format. The data can be converted into a text file in UTF-8 format and analysed in corpus analysis software like AntConc, as described in Part 3 of the DMRMs. The face pager is very easy to use as it has various data harvesting options. For Example - comments, photo likes, comments on posts, video comments, and video likes, and it has almost all the functions that researchers can think of. However, since no single tool can serve every purpose of the study, Face pagers can't gather data beyond Facebook IDs. Companies, governments, and individuals have individual Facebook pages like personal domains to reach the world with a single click. Another free tool must be tried to collect data in the same manner as before. There is a disclaimer here that no standard software selection for data retrieval exists. Many other paid software can nicely do the same job, but here, open source and free tools are encouraged for academic purposes. Also, new APIs (application programming interface), access tokens, etc., keep on coming, and the already usable free software may not work in the changed scenario. In this case, a researcher is required to have good knowledge of digital skills and digital literacy. Hence, for collecting data from Facebook Pages, a non-programming exercise needs to be performed, and it would bring each Facebook post's number of likes, shares and comments, the number of Facebook reactions (Like, Love, Wow, Haha, Sad, Angry), comments and Facebook IDs of the users who commented, shared, or liked (privacy issues apply here). You can click the link: https://nocodewebscraping.com/how-to- extract-data-from-facebook- page-competitor-analysis/. This link would open a web page where, by following a few steps, you can harvest the data in the following manner.

Analysis The methods mentioned above have a few limitations. First, there is a limit to the quantum of data extraction as per the API limit. The common restrictions associated with freebies apply here also. Second, the above freeware can collect data, as it is, from a Facebook ID or Page, which means you can't collect data as per your own choice of words or query, e.g. harvesting all the Facebook posts or comments which contain "demonetisation" and India is not possible. To overcome this problem, Google Power Search commands (site: facebook.com demonetisation OR demonetization AND India) are a powerful method that brings 1,53000 results. The number of posts can be randomised, and content can be saved manually or by using the Google Chrome extension (link clump). This would harvest the data per the posts' headline and the corresponding URL, as shown in the Table. The latter can be opened separately in browsers, and the content can be copied and pasted. Hello world! This is www.facebook.com/indiaindetails/videos/22740703436291 a documentary on Our new video is www.facebook.com/IndiaBakchod/videos/1287137644663 about Demonetization... Demonetisation - www.facebook.com/natgeotv.india/videos/1015565551643 Shook the country... Indians for www.facebook.com/groups/demon2016/
Actualization of
Democracy
Public Group
What India's Big www.facebook.com/wsjindia/posts/977992965638557

Internet Research Bang
Methods-I demonetisation... - Demonetisation: Panel www.facebook.com/events/211008546012741/ Discussion convened by Oxford
India Centre
MarkandeyKatju - www.facebook.com/justicekatju/posts/1477368848970323
Demonetization India
is not a developed... Indian Economy www.facebook.com/pratiyogitadarpaneng/posts/10154847 Article-: Demonetisation... Demonetisation India www.facebook.com/Demonetisation-India-
- Home 7460140322182
Another automated method is to open the content of these URLs all at once by pasting in www.voyant.com The corpus of Facebook posts or comments being searched this way presents multiple data analysis and interpretation styles, both visual and text. Moreover, Facebook data in Hindi, Punjabi and other regional languages can be collected and analysed easily. The site even generates an interaction of selected terms (e.g. demonetisation or BJP) with other words in the bubble form. The links between the objects show a dynamic interaction between the actors in the social media data. The other functions and interpretations of the data are the same as those of the "Digital Data Analysis" chapter of DMRMs Part 3 (Corpus method of analysis).

Analysis Another deep, insightful way of looking at Facebook's social media data(social network analysis) is downloading your own Facebook data as a PDF file (using the Netvizz App) and opening it in Gephi (www.gephi.org/users/download/). Once open, the network may look like the one in the next image.

Internet Research The circles depict the nodes (people), and the arrows between them show the Methods-I "interaction" between the nodes. The direction of arrows indicates the direction of communication from A to B nodes or vice versa. There may not be single arrows between two or more nodes, meaning there is no communication between these groups of nodes (people). Gephi is an open- source and free software that can map the interaction between people on Facebook. However, its limitation is that it can only analyse your network, and issues related to privacy, permissions and law emerge while analysing other people's or organisations' networks. However, to promote social network analysis, Stanford University has created a few open network datasets available at https://snap.stanford.edu/index.html . "Social network analysis is the mapping and measuring relationships and flows between people, groups, organisations, computers or other information/knowledge processing entities." (Valdis Krebs, 2002). Social Network Analysis (SNA) is a method for visualising our people and connection power, leading us to identify how we can best interact to share knowledge" (ibid). Gephi can also analyse the non-Facebook network dataset, as shown below. It has many more features, like measuring the strength of connection, identifying the community in the network, and ways to spread the message quickly in a network. You can choose a good video tutorial available on www.youtube.com for more detailed functions of Gephi. With the new technological developments, ready-made network data sets of Facebook interaction, X (formerly Twitter), worldwide communication patterns of e-mails, and the like may soon be available in the public domain. These data sets can enrich our insight into social media analysis through social network analysis. A Google Power search may reveal a few of them that are already available for free download and distribution.
9.8.2 YouTube Data Analysis
A very simple analysis of harvesting the YouTube Comments, video views, likes, video description, duration, etc., can be done through https://ytdt.digitalmethods.net/

Analysis This website also allows you to export the comments network as a PDF file for analysis in Gephi. Note: -
1. X (formerly Twitter) allows only 7-10 days old tweets by freeware, and
you may have to pay for old tweets.
2. Data extraction from Facebook is more challenging than YouTube and X
(formerly Twitter).
3. Every type of social media analysis must be done using external text
analysis software (corpus) or specialised software like Mozdeah, which is only for X (formerly Twitter).
4. A random search on Google would show many websites that can analyse
X (formerly Twitter) data for trending hashtags, X (formerly Twitter) statistics, the sentiment of any person or product on X (formerly Twitter), etc., but most of them (free) do it with a very small sample of tweets, and paid software provides exhaustive and deep analysis.
5. For collecting older tweets, Google power searching commands can be
applied, just like the one applied in the case of Facebook above. This way, the old tweets can be retrieved free of cost, but they are slightly difficult to harvest because of their format. Ethical Guidelines in Social Media Research - A researcher must deal with this very carefully since network data is people's data. "One of the biggest areas of concern with social media data is the extent to which such data should be considered public or private data" (Townsend & Wallace, n.d.). The process of evaluating the research ethics cannot be ignored simply because the data are seemingly public" (Boyd and Crawford 2012, p672). Whether online postings are public or private is determined to some extent by the online setting itself and whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy on behalf of the social media user (British et al., 2013). Though data is shared publicly on networks for general viewing, it is always advisable to mask the identity of the user's IDs for the loss of reputation, motive

Internet Research attribution, and public shame. Hence, social media analysis tends to Methods-I compromise the anonymity of the users. The same is well guarded in the traditional method of research. Exposing the identity may result in embarrassment and even prosecution. Data belonging to the vulnerable sections of society, like children, women, and minorities, warrants extra care. When reporting the results or referring to any individual post, the researcher should think about either paraphrasing the same or removing the user IDs or both. Alongside this, the researcher must consider the legal issues and the terms and conditions of data extraction. The data extraction must follow the institution's ethical guidelines, the funding agency's policies, and the data policies of the land. According to the Association of Internet Researchers (2012), no set of Internet research guidelines can be static because technologies and the way that technologies are used are constantly changing. Hence, the researcher, the custodian of the public's data, is the trustee, too.
9.9 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we have discussed the key features of social media analysis and its characteristics. We have also discussed how data is collected and managed, its significance, and the challenges of data management. The Unit has defined concepts of social cohesion, the different centralised and decentralised elements of social networks, and the different terminologies associated with social media network analysis. We also briefly discussed audience perception and network theories connected to social anthropology.
9.10 KEYWORDS
Structural Holes: In social media, the gaps or spaces between different clusters or groups of users who share a common platform are called structural holes. Platforms can facilitate connections across these structural holes, enhancing diverse interactions and information flow. Simmelian Ties: Strong relationships between individuals or within specific online communities that develop close-knit connections signify simmelian ties. Diffusion: A viral content or trend that quickly progresses through the social media user base is called diffusion. It usually refers to the spread of information, trends, or novel ideas through the network. Small World: The "small world" concept, defined within the domains of social media, suggests that individuals are interrelated through surprisingly diminutive chains of acquaintances. Concepts like friend recommendations or mutual contacts positioned in the web world draw attention to this concept of social networks' small-world nature. Reciprocity: A sense of mutual link-up prevails in social media, where if one user follows another, there's a huge possibility of a reciprocal action. Briefly, in social media, reciprocity correlates to common connections, where users, whenever possible, often follow back those who follow them. Social Support: Social media provides a platform for individuals to offer

and receive emotional, informational, or instrumental support. This support Analysis can come from close ties or broader network connections, contributing to users' well-being.
9.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Chamria, R. (2022, June 24). Decentralised social media: Will it replace
popular centralised social media sites? Blockchain Deployment and Management Platform | Zeeve. https://www.zeeve.io/blog/decentralized- social-media/
2. Freeman, L. C. (2014). The development of social network analysis -
with an emphasis on recent events. The SAGE Handbook of Social Network Analysis, pp. 26-39. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446294413.n3
3. Ganis, M., & Kohirkar, A. (2015). Social media analytics: Techniques
and insights for extracting business value from social media. IBM Press.
4. Hunsinger, J., Klastrup, L., & Allen, M. (2010). International handbook
of Internet research. Springer Science & Business Media.
5. McGloin, J. M., & Kirk, D. S. (2009). Social network analysis.
Handbook of Quantitative Criminology, pp. 209-224. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77650-7_11
6. McGloin, J. M., & David S. Kirk. (2010). "An Overview of Social
Network Analysis." Journal of Criminal Justice Education 21(2): 169-
181. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10511251003693694
7. Murray, L. (1999). Final report on social cohesion. Ottawa: The Standing
Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science, and Technology.
8. R. Jon McGee & Richard L (2016). Theory in Social and Cultural
Anthropology: An Encyclopedia, L. Theory in Social and Cultural
Anthropology, Sage Publications.
9. Rombach, M. P., Porter, M. A., Fowler, J. H., & Mucha, P. J. (2012).
Core-periphery structure in networks. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2002684
10. Sajithra K, S. K. (2013). Social media - History and components. IOSR
Journal of Business and Management, 7(1), 69-74. https://doi.org/10.9790/487x-0716974
11. Sponder, Marshall. (2014). Social Media Analytics: Effective Tools for
Building, Interpreting, and Using Metrics.
12. Wasserman, S., & Galaskiewicz, J. (1994). Advances in social network
analysis: Research in the social and behavioural sciences. SAGE Publications.
13. Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. (1994). Social network analysis: Methods
and applications. Cambridge University Press.

9.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Methods-I
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Social media analysis is an up-and-coming area that is largely the by-
product of connectivity and interactive tools and sites. They are the core of studying issues about lifestyles and activities in the digital realms capable of; there is so much misinformation, fragmentation, and confusion within the marketplace today that it is very difficult to know how to choose the right platforms and how to set up the right processes to achieve our goals. Social Media Analytics is for anyone who seeks the right technologies to implement social listening and measurement programs. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Data management in social media refers to the strategies, processes, and
practices crucial for managing and systematising the vast amount of data generated through social media platforms. The core elements of data analysis are employing tools and techniques to analyse social media data and derive meaningful insights. In the age of Artificial Intelligence, using algorithms to predict trends, sentiment, and user behaviour based on social media data can help reach the audience and generate an idea for the consumer-driven world. This is the most important part of the entire data-management process. Prompt data analysis requires marketing and technical skills to know what the numbers mean, and which are important. The marketing analytics process leads to suggestions for enhancement, planning new programs, and creating new budgets more sustainable to the market demands. Understanding the social media equation is crucial in a market-driven world where stringent marketing programs must allow marketing managers to update their cases to the market's demands, leading to a decent sales pitch. Centralisation: A centralised network architecture is developed around a single server that handles all the major processing. Less powerful workstations connect to the main server and submit their requests to it rather than performing them directly. This can include applications, data storage, and utilities. Centralised networks do have their limitations, too. For example, a single point of failure can be a big risk factor for organisations. The centralisation of social media can be compromised in terms of censorship and integrity of content created by users. Examples of centralised social media are Facebook, Instagram, and LinkedIn. Decentralised refers to the social networks that operate on independently run servers rather than on a centralised server without the role of business ownership, and here, no single authority holds the data. Rather, it is decentralised over connection nodes among the networks. This, in turn, creates room. Despite the advantages of decentralised social media networks, there are apparent possibilities of attacks orchestrated by content creator communities that could lead to a large extent of loss of information. Mastodon is an example of such a

decentralised network. It uses free, open-source program code. Another Analysis good example is Steem, which provides a social blockchain. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Social capital refers to the resources and advantages individuals or
groups can access through social networks and relationships. It encompasses trust, cooperation, and shared values within a community or social group. The two main elements of social capital are: Bonding Social Capital: The connections and relationships within a close-knit group of people sharing similar characteristics, such as family, friends, or members of a particular community, are essentially bonding. This creates a deeper sense of relationships while making available support within the group. Bridging Social Capital: Social groups or individuals with various backgrounds exist on social media. Bridging social capital refers to where connections are built, fostering interaction and cooperation across different communities, leading to a more all-encompassing and diverse network. Check Your Progress: 4
1. In social network analysis, an "ego network" is the connections closely
connected to an individual node (ego). It includes the ego (central node) and its immediate connections (alters), providing an in-depth analysis of the local structure of a social network.
2. Diffusion refers to the spread of viral content or trends that quickly
progresses through the user base in social media. It usually refers to the spread of information, trends, or novel ideas through the network. The "small world" concept, which is defined within the domains of social media, suggests that individuals are interrelated through surprisingly diminutive chains of acquaintances. Concepts like friend recommendations or mutual contacts positioned in the web world draw attention to this concept of the world nature of social networks.

Methods-I

Analysis Block
INTERNET RESEARCH METHODS-II
UNIT 10
Web Archiving
UNIT 11
Textual Analysis
UNIT 12
Online Ethnography
UNIT 13
Narrative Analysis

BLOCK 3 INTRODUCTION
Methods-I Block 3 continues the earlier one on various data collection tools. Studying Internet histories is one of the unique opportunities for data collection of past data from online spaces. Similarly, textual, and narrative analysis will enable research on Web 2.0-based interactions. As Online Communities are yet another unique feature of cyberspace, online ethnography will help you unravel the nuances of interest groups.
Unit 10 Web Archiving - Understanding Internet Histories and Beyond"
explains the intriguing world of preserving digital footprints. We will explore the origins of web archiving, its pivotal role in Internet history research, ethical considerations, and its significance for media professionals.
Unit 11 Textual Analysis explores perspectives, types, and presentation
methods. We'll learn to understand diverse viewpoints on analysing texts, examine various types of texts and how to collect them and learn effective strategies for presenting our textual analysis.
Unit 12 Online Ethnography, explains the digital landscape, exploring the
necessity of online ethnography. We'll examine qualitative and quantitative methods, weighing their advantages and disadvantages. Moreover, we'll discuss the ethical considerations and responsibilities inherent in this fascinating field.
Unit 13 Narrative Analysis - We'll explore its definition and functions,
delve into its social dimensions, discuss methods for collecting narratives, and learn techniques for analysis. Through an example, we'll illustrate how narrative analysis unveils layers of meaning within personal and collective stories. These Units would give you a broad perspective on exploring the various dimensions of cyberspace.

UNIT 10 WEB ARCHIVING
Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 Understanding Internet Histories as a Research Methodology
10.2.1 Introduction to Internet Histories
10.2.2 Areas of Interest in Internet Histories
10.2.3 Research Trends in Internet Histories
10.3 Web Archiving as a Tool for Internet Histories
10.3.1 What is web archiving?
10.3.2 Basic Concepts in Web Archiving
10.3.3 Types of web archiving
10.3.4 Why Archive Websites
10.4 Historical Context of Web Archiving
10.4.1 Early efforts and challenges
10.4.2 Milestones in the development of web archiving
10.5 Basics of Web Archiving Tools
10.5.1 Introduction to user-friendly tools for archiving (e.g., browser extensions)
10.5.2 How professionals can integrate archiving into their workflow
10.5.3 Web archiving features, strengths, and limitations.
10.6 Records and Information Management
10.6.1 Websites as records
10.6.2 Selecting and collecting
10.6.3 Hints and tips on saving and archiving
10.7 Ethical Considerations and Legal Framework
10.7.1 Legal and Ethical Issues in Web Archiving
10.7.2 Copyright, fair use, and permissions in the digital age
10.7.3 Balancing the public's right to know with privacy concerns
10.8 Web Archiving for Media Professionals
10.8.1 Why is it important for media professionals?
10.8.2 Introduction to preserving digital content for journalistic and media purposes.
10.8.3 The need for archiving in the context of digital media
10.9 Future of Web Archiving in Media
10.9.1 Emerging technologies and trends in archiving
10.9.2 Opportunities for media professionals in the evolving digital landscape
10.10 Let Us Sum Up
10.11 Keywords
10.12 Further Readings
10.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers

Internet Research 10.0 INTRODUCTION Methods-II Web archiving refers to collecting and storing web pages and websites to ensure their availability for future access. The principal objective of web archiving is to preserve the content and structure of websites over time, allowing researchers, historians, and the public to access and study the evolution of the new medium. Web archiving involves using dedicated tools and technologies to capture and save the content of web pages, including text, images, videos, and other multimedia elements. Imagine web archiving as a way to capture and save a snapshot of websites so that people in the future can explore them. It is analogous to taking pictures of web pages, meticulously preserving how they appeared and functioned during a specific period. The dynamic nature of websites heightens the intricacy of web archiving. They undergo constant updates, relocations, or redesigns, requiring a continuous and ongoing archiving effort. The backbone of web archiving is the technique known as "crawling." This involves using specialised tools to systematically navigate the links on web pages, generating copies of their content. Typically beginning from a chosen web page, which often is the homepage, the process aims to hoard a diverse collection of web pages. However, challenges arise in capturing content concealed behind logins or interactive elements like videos. They add a layer of Complexity to the archiving process. Regular crawling of pages is significant in skilfully capturing the evolving iterations they naturally undergo. The objective extends beyond preserving visual aesthetics; it encompasses the absolute conservation of functionality, providing a holistic representation of the Internet's evolution. Archived pages find a home in specific file formats such as WARC (Web ARChive) or WACZ (Web Archive Collection Zipped), ensuring their enduring existence. Equally significant is the accompanying metadata, a trove of information guiding archivists and future users. This metadata searches the inner workings of a website and bears a timestamp, which is important for authenticating the archived resources. Imagine you have a tool that lets you "play back" these archived files--a digital time machine for the Internet. This tool facilitates seamless interaction with archived websites, mirroring their original functionality on the live web. It transcends the mere preservation of visual elements, encapsulating the website's underlying code, images, videos, and design aspects. This meticulous process is not just about saving pictures; it is about preserving the entire immersive experience, allowing future generations to delve into and comprehend the evolution of the Internet over time. Web archiving is a careful endeavour to capture the essence of the Internet, employing crawling techniques to navigate the dynamic web landscape. Archived pages, stored in specific formats with accompanying metadata, serve as a time capsule and playback tools enable users to explore and interact with the preserved digital heritage of the web.

Keeping Website Life in Web Archiving
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Develop a comprehensive understanding of Internet histories as a research methodology. * Gain in-depth knowledge of the historical context and basics of web archiving tools. * Explore principles of records and information management in web archiving. * Appreciate ethical considerations and legal frameworks associated with web archiving. * Recognise the application of web archiving in media professions. * Envision future trends and developments in web archiving within the media landscape.
10.2 UNDERSTANDING INTERNET HISTORIES
AS A RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Studying Internet Histories is like exploring a big online storybook. Instead of just seeing the Internet as a tool, researchers look at it as something influenced by people and cultures. They dig into digital archives, like online libraries, to see what individuals, groups, and organisations have done online. They use knowledge from history, communication, media studies, and technology to get the whole picture. The goal is to find stories in these digital archives and determine how society and culture have influenced the development of the Internet. It's like decoding how the Internet has changed over time.
10.2.1 Introduction to Internet Histories
Exploring the Internet's history is like diving into a big sea of information using powerful digital tools like "web archives." Instead of just keeping records, the Internet is seen as a cultural force shaping how we remember our 171

Internet Research online lives from the 1990s. "Internet Histories" uses knowledge from Methods-II different areas to understand how the Internet has made our daily lives. It is like looking in a mirror to see how the Internet significantly impacts our future, based on past events, and carefully saved in the Web's vast archives.
10.2.2 Areas of Interest in Internet Histories
Research in Internet Histories encompasses diverse areas, reflecting the multifaceted evolution of the Internet and its deep impact on various aspects of society. Here are key areas of interest within Internet histories: Digital Research Methodologies: The Internet, becoming a big information source, changed how we study history. Now, we use computers and digital tools for research, writing, and analysis. This shift is called digital humanities. Impact on Historical Narratives: Web archives are changing history by including more voices. Now, we hear from people often left out in the past, making our understanding of the past more complete and fairer. Societal Implications: Delve into the societal implications of preserving web archives, including how these archives contribute to the advocacy for justice, equality, and informed policy decisions. Explore how access to historical digital records influences a deeper societal understanding. Interdisciplinary Perspectives: Explore the interdisciplinary nature of Internet Histories, considering insights from history, communication studies, media studies, and technology studies. Investigate how this approach provides a nuanced understanding of the Internet as a cultural phenomenon. Forces Shaping the Digital Present and Future: Examine how Internet Histories serve as a mirror reflecting the profound impact of the Internet on various aspects of our lives, including work, interaction, and societal structures from the past to the future.
10.2.3 Research Trends in Internet Histories
Research Trends in Internet Histories encompass a dynamic array of methodological approaches aimed at unravelling the complex evolution of the digital realm. Delving into this domain likely involves discussions on various research methodologies, offering insights into how scholars navigate the challenges of studying Internet histories. Archival research takes centre stage, enabling the exploration of historical websites, forums, and digital artefacts that shape our online past. Qualitative methods, such as ethnographic studies and content analysis, provide a lens into Internet histories' cultural and social dimensions.

Quantitative web history methods involve the systematic analysis of large- scale datasets to uncover patterns, trends, and statistical relationships within the historical development of the web. Longitudinal studies play a crucial role, providing a temporal dimension that tracks changes over time and addressing the challenges inherent in researching a rapidly evolving digital landscape. User-centred approaches recognise the agency of individuals in shaping Internet narratives, incorporating user experience research and participatory methods. Network Analysis is a powerful research method within the social sciences that can be applied to study web history. It involves examining and visualising relationships and interactions among various entities within a network. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at this Unit's end.
1. Explain the significance of web archiving in preserving online content.

10.3 WEB ARCHIVING A SA TOOL OF
INTERNET HISTORIES
Web archiving is vital for Internet Histories, preserving online content for researchers and the public. Archives are a rich resource for history, sociology, media studies, and computer science. They're not just for academics. They also assist in legal cases, business continuity, and cultural preservation. Archived websites offer evidence in legal matters, aid disaster recovery, and protect digital artefacts showcasing societal trends, culture, and history. This is essential for understanding the transformations in our online world.
10.3.1 What is web archiving?
Like preserving paper documents, web archiving involves gathering and safeguarding websites from the vast World Wide Web. 'Web archivists' manage these archives, ensuring access for various groups, including government, businesses, researchers, and the public. Automated tools like web crawlers are used to collect and save information for archival purposes. Archived websites, accessible online, provide a snapshot of their live counterparts, allowing navigation and viewing at specific points in time. Some of us use simple tools for internal archiving, while national libraries and diverse groups focus on preserving culturally significant web content. We must remember that commercial solutions cater to businesses' specific

Internet Research archiving needs, collectively forming a digital library that documents the Methods-II Internet's evolution for exploration.
Web Archiving
10.3.2 Basic Concepts in Web Archiving
The Internet changes a lot, and sometimes, we can lose important stuff because of updates, technical issues, or purposeful removal. Web archiving stops this by preserving content for ongoing access. It is not just about saving simple files; it also captures the live web and tracks how websites work. Copies are saved in standard formats (WARC or WACZ) with metadata for proof. Archivists use this to verify and load files into playback tools, letting users experience websites as if they were live, not just pictures. This keeps web history safe and deals with challenges.
10.3.3 Types of web archiving
Websites can be archived in three primary ways. (i) Client-side web archiving involves copying website content to a user's computer, making it the most common and readily achievable method. (ii) Transaction-based web archiving captures all website traffic, providing a complete record but requiring association with the website owner. (iii) Server-side web archiving entails installing a backup system directly on the website. This is the most accurate but costly approach. Unlike website backups, which are solely intended for restoring lost or damaged sites, web archiving enables users to access and steer through archived websites as if they were still active.
10.3.4 Why archive websites?
Websites are most important for organisations because they have crucial data. However, the Internet changes frequently, and websites can be updated or deleted quickly. Web archiving solves this by saving websites as they were at a particular time. Unlike regular backups, it keeps the Internet real. Archiving

lets organisations retain old information not found on current sites. It helps save important history and shows that an organisation manages information well, making it look good.
10.4 HISTORIES CONTEXT OF WEB ARCHIVING
Back in the early 1990s, the World Wide Web had quickly reached the hands of all and sundry. In 1996, Brewster Kahle founded the Internet Archive. His team was the first to save websites using slow Internet. National libraries like the Library of Congress and the British Library started saving important websites in the late 1990s. A bunch of people, including Herbert Van de Sompel, teamed up in 2001 for the "Harvesting for the Future" project, making saving websites easier. In 2003, the Memento project started capturing web pages at specific times, making it better to see how the web changed.
10.4.1 Early efforts and challenges
Facing technical challenges, projects like the Memento and WARC format deal with the need to save tricky web content. They also manage copyright and big data with tools like Hadoop. The International Internet Preservation Consortium promotes global teamwork and shares the best ways to do things. Despite early issues, these projects lay the groundwork for web archiving, showing how working together is powerful. Web archiving keeps changing with new technologies, securing our digital history for the future. Early challenges build the foundation, like deciding how much to save, storing data, technological problems, legal issues, ethical questions, money struggles, and infrastructure issues. This shows how much dedication it takes to save the web's history.
10.4.2 Milestones in the development of web archiving
The evolution of web archiving has been a captivating journey with important milestones shaping the capture and preservation of our dynamic digital world: Early Beginnings (1990s): 1996: The Internet Wayback Machine pioneers public web archiving. 1998: The US National Digital Library Program begins archiving government websites. 1999: The first International Web Archiving Workshop (IWAW) brings together archivists and technologists. Building Infrastructure (2000s): 2001: The Archive-It project launches a scalable web archiving service. 2003: The LOCKSS (Lots of Copies Keep Stuff Safe) program promotes distributed web archiving for redundancy and preservation. 2007: The Warc file format is introduced for standardised web archives.

Internet Research Addressing Complexity (2010s): Methods-II 2012: The Memento protocol enables time-traveling access to archived web pages. 2013: The first International Networking Conference focuses on web archiving challenges in developing countries. 2015: The Pandora project explores archiving social media and the dynamic web. Recent Advancements (2020s): 2020: The Web Archiving Testbed launches for testing and developing new web archiving tools. 2022: The IIPC (International Internet Preservation Consortium) Web Archiving Working Group releases guidelines for ethical web archiving. 2023: The focus shifts towards preserving emerging web formats like interactive content and Web3 applications. These milestones underscore web archiving's adaptability to technological innovations and the evolving Internet landscape.
10.5 BASICS OF WEB ARCHIVING TOOLS
Exploring the realm of web archiving tools, we find a range of user-friendly options catering to diverse needs, from casual researchers to seasoned professionals. Browser extensions like Webrecorder and Save Page WE simplify the archiving process, enabling one-click capture even for those with minimal technical knowledge. Additionally, platforms like Archive-It offer intuitive interfaces, allowing users to create custom collections and schedule regular captures effortlessly. These tools prioritise accessibility, encouraging individuals from various backgrounds to actively participate in preserving our digital heritage.
Web Archiving Tools

10.5.1 Introduction to User-friendly Tools for Archiving (e.g.,
Web Archiving
Browser Extensions)
In our journey into the realm of web archiving tools, we are introduced to user-friendly options like Webrecorder and Save Page WE, serving a diverse audience from beginners to experts. These tools simplify the archiving process with one-click functionality and extend to advanced features such as selective archiving, customisable metadata, and collaborative capabilities. Recognising the paramount importance of digital preservation, institutions have adopted dedicated tools like Archive-It, Webrecorder, and Heritrix. This collective effort emphasises accessibility, welcoming individuals from various backgrounds to actively contribute to preserving our evolving digital landscape. Webrecorder: Features: Webrecorder simplifies web page capture, allowing users to record and archive dynamic, interactive content. Accessibility: Designed for minimal technical expertise, its user-friendly interface and browser extension enables effortless archiving with a single click. Save Page WE: User-Friendly Extension: Save Page WE is a browser extension for easy web page archiving suitable for casual users and researchers. Single-Click Archiving: Known for simplicity, the extension streamlines archiving with a one-click solution. Archive-It: Custom Collections: Beyond individual page archiving, Archive-It enables custom collections for specific themes or topics. Scheduled Captures: Notably, users can schedule regular captures, maintaining updated archives over time.
Community Engagement: Diverse Participation: User-friendly tools
encourage varied engagement in preserving digital heritage, from casual users to professionals. Promoting Accessibility: As this emphasises accessibility, it allows users from diverse backgrounds to contribute. Educational Initiatives: Tutorials and Resources: Tools offer tutorials, lowering entry barriers and empowering users with knowledge for web archiving contributions.
10.5.2 How Professionals can Integrate Archiving into their
Workflow Embarking on our exploration of web archiving, we find professionals spanning roles, such as librarians, archivists, media experts, and researchers, seamlessly integrating web archiving into their workflows. This practice, crucial for information preservation, sees widespread adoption of dedicated tools like Archive-It, Webrecorder, and Heritrix by institutions. These tools, equipped with advanced features like selective archiving, metadata customisation, and collaborative capabilities, empower professionals to curate comprehensive digital archives. As they navigate legal and ethical considerations, including copyright, terms of service, and privacy, professionals ensure compliance with regulations. Web archiving transcends

Internet Research technicality, evolving into a strategic and ethical practice within the Methods-II professional domain. Heritrix
10.5.3 Web archiving features, strengths, and limitations.
The journey into web archiving tools reveals their diverse features, enriching their effectiveness in capturing and preserving web content. These tools capture entire websites and specific pages, navigate intricate sites, and replicate archived content within its original context. Utilising advanced crawling algorithms, they ensure comprehensive coverage of dynamic web content, making them important for studying website evolution, digital culture, and societal trends. However, challenges persist, particularly in accurately capturing interactive elements like forms and JavaScript-based interactivity. Additionally, difficulties may arise when capturing content from password-protected areas or websites with intricate structures. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at this Unit's end.
1. Analyse how the interface, content, and user interactions have
transformed over time, revealing the platform's journey in the digital landscape.

2. Identify a web archive platform and explore its contents. Share your
findings on how the archive preserves online content and its potential benefits for researchers.

10.6 RECORDS AND INFORMATION
MANAGEMENT
Web archiving emerges as a central element in contemporary records and information management, tackling the distinctive challenges presented by online content's dynamic and constantly evolving nature. As a fundamental aspect of information governance, web archiving encompasses capturing, preserving, and managing web-based records. This all-inclusive approach guarantees the enduring accessibility, authenticity, and integrity of these records over time, highlighting its significance in pointing out the intricacies of modern digital information landscapes.
10.6.1 Websites as records
Incorporating effective website management into a holistic information and records management strategy aligns with practices for various organisational records. Similar to traditional files, websites play a crucial role in current and future activities, necessitating management for ongoing use, legal compliance, evidential support, and preservation of historical or cultural significance. Ensuring the accuracy of web content before publication is vital, given that even briefly live information may be archived or cached by search engines. Treating websites as records, involving the capture, management, and retrieval of information, significantly contributes to overall records management. The appearance and content of websites at specific times serve as valuable records, providing crucial evidence for legal or evidential purposes. Embracing such practices safeguards organisations and enhances the integrity of disseminated online information.
10.6.2 Selecting and collecting
Websites serve as visual and informational records, reflecting an organisation's intended public presentation and conveyed messages. Documents like board minutes, reports, policies, and plans embedded within websites act as concrete records of the activities they represent, signifying the time and resources invested by creators. Evaluating a website's value involves determining if it contains important business information or historical significance. Questions about content duplication or preservation in other locations, like shared network drives or electronic records management systems, aid informed decisions on retention periods. Adopting a format- neutral approach ensures uniform treatment of records, managing them based on purpose and utility rather than file format, encompassing spreadsheets, PDF documents, images, or websites consistently. Another thing pertinent to this is determining the archiving frequency. Depending on the rate of website 179

Internet Research and content changes, along with the relative importance of the content, Methods-II archiving may be needed once a year, twice a year, every three months, or on a customised schedule for accurately capturing evolving content. Non- technical considerations, especially regarding the scope and scale of collecting, impact the choice of a technical approach aligned with preservation needs. Regular archiving of valuable website content ensures capturing and preserving the evolving media landscape for future reference. Check Your Progress: 3 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at this Unit's end.
1. Explore how web archiving can enhance online storytelling.

10.7 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND LEGAL
FRAMEWORK
Safeguarding digital content is a major challenge for libraries worldwide. As digital materials can get lost or deleted easily, we must ensure they are preserved and stored appropriately. Libraries are well-equipped for this task, but creating a long-lasting plan poses significant challenges. Legal aspects, such as responsibility and abiding by the rules, are key concerns in this process. We must address these issues to ensure a robust plan for saving digital materials. It is important to understand and handle the complexities responsibly. Keep in mind that libraries play a crucial role in this, and we can contribute to preserving digital content for the future.
10.7.1 Legal and Ethical Issues in Web Archiving
Regarding web archiving, we must be mindful of legal and ethical considerations. We must respect copyrighting. So, understanding who owns the content and getting permissions are the keys. We must balance our preservation goals with the website's terms of service. Ethical practices, like anonymisation and consent, protect personal privacy must be followed. Being mindful of what we choose to archive minimises bias and ensures inclusivity. Accuracy requires careful verification and documentation. Balancing public access with safeguarding sensitive information may mean access restrictions. For long-term preservation, clear ownership and ongoing funding are essential. As the web is global, complying with international laws is a must. We must stay informed and collaborate with archivists, legal experts, and policymakers for a responsible approach.
10.7.2 Copyright, fair use, and permissions in the digital age
Copyright laws protect creators' rights, overseeing reproduction, distribution, and display. Fair use allows limited usage for purposes like criticism,

commentary, news reporting, teaching, scholarship, or research without explicit permission. However, clear-cut consent from copyright holders is necessary for various applications beyond fair use. It is crucial to walk through these principles to uphold intellectual property rights, nurture creativity, and responsibly share information in the digital domain. Always remember that these guidelines ensure a fair and respectful digital environment as we explore various opportunities in our online activities. Copyright: Copyright is a legal framework that grants exclusive rights to creators of original works, encompassing literature, art, music, and digital content. These rights, applicable to online materials like blogs, images, videos, and software, provide copyright holders exclusive control over reproduction, distribution, display, and performance. The duration of these rights varies by jurisdiction, extending the creator's lifetime plus a specified number of years. Fair Use: Fair use allows limited use of copyrighted material without seeking permission or paying the copyright holder. It balances copyright holders' rights with the public's interest, considering factors like the purpose of use, the nature of the work, the amount used, and its impact on the original work's market value. Permissions: Permissions necessitate explicit consent from copyright holders for uses beyond fair use. This involves obtaining written permission, negotiating terms, or paying fees. Permissions are crucial for commercial use, creating derived works, or whenever you go beyond fair use allowances. In the digital age, obtaining permission can be done through online platforms or directly from copyright holders. Digital Age Challenges: Copyright concerns intensify in the digital age due to the ease of copying and distributing content online. Issues like digital piracy, unauthorised sharing, and determining fair use in the digital domain have gained prominence. Digital rights management (DRM) technologies control access to digital content, and creative licenses provide creators with a framework to specify permissions for their work. Technological Developments: Technological advancements, particularly in artificial intelligence and machine learning, have introduced new challenges to copyright. Questions arise regarding automated content creation, the incorporation of copyrighted material in algorithms, and the evolving impact on fair use considerations.
10.7.3 Balancing the public's right to know with privacy
concerns Balancing the public's right to know is crucial, especially in today's digital age, which has privacy concerns. Ensuring public access to information is fundamental for a transparent and informed society, maintaining democratic principles and accountability. But we need to carefully deal with it. Privacy rights, protecting personal autonomy, dignity, and security, must be respected. This delicate balance often gets tested in media and journalism, especially when covering sensitive 181

Internet Research topics. Journalists strive to disseminate accurate information while Methods-II considering ethical and legal guidelines, sometimes involving redaction or anonymisation. In our digital world, where personal information is easily accessible, maintaining this balance becomes quite the challenge. Concerns like private details disclosure, surveillance, and the risk of misinformation highlight the need for responsible journalism and robust privacy safeguards. Laws and regulations aim to guide us, but their interpretation sparks ongoing debates and legal challenges. So, buckle up as we navigate this intriguing terrain together! Check Your Progress: 4 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Highlight how web archiving plays a role in reporting for news media.

2. Emphasise the benefits of open-source reporting and distributive
reporting in the context of web archiving.

10.8 WEB ARCHIVING FOR MEDIA
PROFESSIONALS
Media archive management is all about organising and storing various media types, like videos and audio files, to make them easy to find and use later on. This involves adding descriptions or metadata, keeping files safe, and ensuring that media can be quickly retrieved. Our main goal is a system where media assets are well-organised, secure, and ready for future use. So, as we explore the world of media, remember the importance of maintaining an organised and accessible archive for a smooth and efficient workflow in the future.
10.8.1 Why is it important for media professionals?
Effective media archive management in the dynamic world of media and entertainment. Maintaining a well-organised archive is indispensable whether you're in production houses, news agencies, or journalism organisations. This

ensures easy access and repurposing of vast content volumes for new projects, re-releases, or licensing opportunities, reducing the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO). Robust media archive management fosters efficient collaboration among diverse project teams, ensuring a seamless workflow. News agencies and broadcasters heavily rely on this approach to curate extensive libraries, providing swift access to historical content for current stories and future reference. It aids journalists and editors in analysing historical trends and crafting compelling visual narratives. Remember, adherence to copyright regulations and licensing requirements is crucial for legal compliance in the ever-evolving landscape of professional media work.
10.8.2 Introduction to Preserving Digital Content for
Journalistic and Media Purposes
In the dynamic field of digital preservation, the goal is to ensure that digital materials remain accessible for future media initiatives. Preserving digital content is crucial in the fast-paced world of journalism and media. It's about ensuring that today's stories, visuals, and narratives stay relevant for future generations. This preservation goes beyond safeguarding files and data; it is about preserving our collective media heritage and recognising the dynamic nature of the digital landscape. For journalistic and media purposes, digital preservation is a commitment to preserving the authenticity and accessibility of content that forms the basis of storytelling. It involves meticulous efforts to recreate the user experience, allowing future journalists and creators to access the rich tapestry of information and visuals that have shaped our worldview. In this digital era, where news unfolds in real-time and multimedia storytelling is key, the challenge is preserving bits and bytes and capturing the spirit and context of narratives woven into the digital fabric.
10.8.3 The need for Archiving in the Context of Digital Media
Archiving is crucial to an organisation's records management strategy, especially in digital media. It involves systematically storing digital documents securely in a long-term physical or digital repository, safeguarding them from damage or destruction to ensure their longevity and accessibility. The primary goal of digital media archiving extends beyond preservation; it aims to store data over an extended period, aligning with the ever-evolving digital landscape. This strategic effort goes further by making records available to the public and future generations, fostering accessibility and historical continuity. Much like their physical counterparts, archived digital media documents become easier to locate, protect, and maintain throughout their lifecycle. Neglecting this essential archiving process can obstruct a business's efficiency in the digital realm, underscoring the critical role digital archiving plays in the seamless functioning and sustainability of a media-centric organisation. Digital media archiving is not just about safeguarding files; it's a commitment to preserving our collective media heritage, ensuring that today's stories and

Internet Research visuals remain accessible and pertinent for future generations in the fast- Methods-II paced world of journalism and media.
10.9 FUTURE OF WEB ARCHIVING IN MEDIA
Web archiving in media holds great promise as it adapts to the dynamic and evolving digital world. We look forward to trends beyond preserving static pages, including dynamic and interactive content with multimedia elements. As our hunger for real-time information grows, web archiving in the media sector is expected to capture breaking news and live events more immediately. This advancement will demand innovative technologies for timely and comprehensive archiving, ensuring the preservation of rapidly changing digital narratives that define the future media landscape. However, challenges arise amidst these opportunities. For a responsible and effective future in web archiving for media, considerations about the ethical use of archived content, evolving copyright issues, and robust preservation strategies must be fully appreciated. This process involves embracing possibilities and addressing ethical and legal considerations that come with the evolving digital landscape.
10.9.1 Emerging Technologies and Trends in Archiving
Emerging technologies significantly influence archiving, introducing new possibilities and challenges. Blockchain technology is gaining support and interest for its potential to enhance the integrity and authenticity of archived records through decentralised and secure ledgers. Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning transform archival processes by enabling automated sorting, categorising, and analysing vast amounts of data. Cloud-based archiving solutions provide measurable and accessible storage, allowing seamless collaboration and remote access. Additionally, advancements in digital preservation techniques, such as format migration and emulation, ensure long-term accessibility of archived content. However, these innovations also bring challenges, including ethical considerations in AI use, data security concerns in cloud storage, and the need for standardised practices in adopting emerging technologies for archiving.
10.9.2 Opportunities for Media Professionals in the Evolving
Digital Landscape
Media professionals find abundant opportunities in the continually evolving digital landscape. The rise of online platforms and streaming services has created diverse avenues for creating, distributing, and engaging content. Social media platforms offer new outlets for storytelling, audience interaction, and brand building. Virtual and augmented reality technologies provide immersive storytelling possibilities, creating novel experiences for audiences. Data analytics and artificial intelligence enable media professionals to understand audience behaviour, personalise content, and optimise strategies for engagement. Podcasting and independent content creation have become more accessible, allowing media professionals to reach specific groups of audiences. Additionally, the global nature of the digital

landscape opens up opportunities for collaboration and content localisation on a broader scale. As the digital ecosystem evolves, media professionals can embrace innovation, expand their skill sets, and explore a dynamic landscape rich with creative and professional potential. Check Your Progress: 5 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss potential challenges related to privacy and responsible use of
archived material.

2. Share your thoughts on the role of web histories in understanding the
digital landscape.

10.10 LET US SUM UP
In the intricate tapestry of Internet Histories, we compared the experience to enjoying a colossal online storybook, discovering how people and cultures intricately shape the Internet. This digital narrative led researchers into vast digital archives resembling online libraries, revealing how societal and cultural influences penetrate the Internet's evolution. Our interdisciplinary journey integrated insights from history, communication, media studies, and technology, with web archiving as a central tool. Beyond preserving content for researchers, it stood as a foundation stone for rich resources in history, sociology, and computer science, surpassing academia to impact legal cases, business continuity, and cultural preservation. Delving into web archiving basics, we gained an understanding of diverse archiving methods, which ensure accessibility amid the Internet's constant instability. Exploring the historical context, we witnessed milestones securing the preservation of our dynamic digital world. User-friendly tools like Webrecorder and Save Page WE democratised archiving, emphasising integration into professional progress. This emphasised the strategic and ethical importance of web archiving, ensuring continuous accessibility and integrity of web-based records.

Internet Research Looking closely into the future, we projected trends and technological Methods-II advancements in web archiving for media, acknowledging challenges of ethics, copyright, and preservation strategies. In essence, web archiving emerged as a guardian of our collective media heritage, endowing media professionals responsible for maintaining an organised and accessible archive, a timeless repository for a flawless and efficient workflow in the ever-evolving media landscape.
10.11 KEYWORDS
Web archives are digital repositories that chronicle the evolving Internet by storing snapshots of web content, enabling users to revisit past versions of websites. They serve as essential historical records and resources for researchers, historians, and the public, employing diverse technologies to capture the dynamic nature of the online landscape. Internet Histories: Internet Histories involve studying the evolution, development, and societal impact by delving into digital archives, using historical data to reveal how online activities and cultures have shaped their course, and combining perspectives from history, communication, media studies, and technological studies. Online Information management involves systematically organising, storing, and disseminating information to support decision-making and operational efficiency. It also encompasses practices like data governance and knowledge management. Legal Issues: Online legal issues are because of challenges and disputes in the digital realm, such as cyber security, digital privacy, intellectual property, and regulatory compliance within the online domain. Resolving these matters involves navigating the complex intersection of law and technology.
10.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Brugger, N. (2016). Introduction: The web's first 25 years. New Media
& Society.
2. Brugger, N. (2019). Understanding the archived web as a historical
source. In The SAGE Handbook of Web History. SAGE Publications Ltd, https://doi.org/10.4135/9781526470546
3. Brugger, Niels and Schroeder, Ralph (Eds). (2017) The Web as
History. [Book]. UCL Press: London
4. Daniel Gomes, Elena Demidova. (2021). The past web. In Springer
eBooks. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-63291-5
5. Katja Muller. (2023). Digital Archives and Collections: Creating online
access to cultural heritage. BERGHAHN BOOKS.
6. Milligan, I. (2017). Welcome to the Web: The online community of
GeoCities during the early years of the World Wide Web. In N. Brugger & R. Schroeder (Eds.), The Web as history (pp. 137-158). London: UCL Press.

7. Niels Brugger. The Archived Web: Doing History in the Digital Age.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, (2018).
8. Rajan, Mira T. Sundaran. (2012). 'At the Frontiers of Lawmaking:
Copyright and the Protection of Culture in India', The WIPO Journal 4(1): 111-20.9. Utpal K Banerjee. (2014). Towards an Online Audio-Visual Cultural
Archive (01 ed., Vol. 01). [Google]. Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts.
10. Venlet, Jessica, Karen Stoll Farrell, Tammy Kim, Allison Jai O'Dell, and
Jackie Dooley. (2018). Descriptive Metadata for Web Archiving: Literature Review of User Needs. Dublin, OH: OCLC Research.
10.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Web archiving plays a crucial role in preserving online content by
capturing and storing web pages, websites, and digital materials for future access and reference. It ensures that valuable digital information remains accessible despite changes in technology, website structures, or the expiration of web content, safeguarding cultural heritage and historical records. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Over time, digital platforms have undergone significant transformations
in interface design, content delivery, and user interactions, reflecting the evolving landscape of technology and user preferences. Early websites featured basic interfaces with static content, limited interactivity, and text-heavy layouts. As technology advanced, platforms embraced multimedia elements, responsive design, and personalised user experiences, enhancing engagement and usability. Social media platforms revolutionised user interactions, facilitating real-time communication, user-generated content, and community building. These developments illustrate the platform's journey from static web pages to dynamic, interactive ecosystems that cater to diverse user needs and preferences.
2. Web archive platforms like the Internet Archive provide invaluable
resources for preserving online content and documenting the evolution of the digital landscape. Through web crawling and archiving, these platforms capture snapshots of websites at different points in time, ensuring the preservation of digital artefacts for future generations. Researchers can explore archived websites to study historical trends, track changes in content and design, and analyse the impact of technological advancements on online communication. Additionally, web archives serve as repositories of cultural heritage, facilitating research in fields such as digital humanities, media studies, and social

Internet Research sciences. Overall, web archives play a crucial role in preserving digital Methods-II history and fostering academic inquiry into the ever-changing digital landscape. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Web archiving enriches online storytelling by preserving historical web
content, ensuring its accessibility for future generations. By capturing websites, social media, and multimedia elements, web archives provide a comprehensive view of digital narratives, enabling researchers, journalists, and storytellers to analyse trends, trace evolutions, and contextualise online discourse over time. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Web archiving is crucial for news media reporting as it preserves online
content, ensuring access to historical data for journalists. It safeguards against content alteration or removal, maintaining the integrity of news stories and allowing for accurate referencing and fact-checking, thus enhancing the credibility of news reporting.
2. Open-source reporting and distributive reporting are empowered by web
archiving. Open-source reporting leverages publicly available information archived online, fostering transparency and collaboration among journalists. Distributive reporting involves decentralised investigation, where journalists worldwide contribute findings, facilitated by archived web data. These approaches democratise journalism, enriching reporting with diverse perspectives and sources. Check Your Progress: 5
1. Challenges related to privacy and responsible use of archived material
include ensuring compliance with data protection regulations, safeguarding sensitive information, and respecting individuals' rights to privacy. Additionally, ethical considerations regarding consent, anonymization, and data retention must be addressed to prevent misuse or unauthorised access to archived data.
2. Web histories play a crucial role in understanding the digital landscape
by providing insights into users' online behaviours, preferences, and interactions. Analysing web histories can reveal trends, patterns, and shifts in digital consumption, facilitating research on information dissemination, user engagement, and online communities. However, ethical considerations regarding data privacy and consent are paramount when accessing and analysing web histories to ensure responsible use and mitigate potential risks of data exploitation.

UNIT 11 TEXTUAL ANALYSIS
Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 Perspectives of Textual Analysis
11.3 Types of text and methods of collection
11.4 Presenting textual analysis.
11.5 Further Readings
11.6 Check Your Progress: Possible Answer
11.0 INTRODUCTION
In this Unit, you will learn about textual analysis as a research method. Before understanding what textual analysis is, let us understand what text means in textual analysis. Text in the textual analysis is something we interpret to draw some meanings out of it. This can be a book, an article, a television programme, a film, a magazine, ornaments, furniture, digital devices, and so on. Text can also be seen as social events in which people act or interact with each other. The interaction can be 'linguistic or non-linguistic' (Fairclough, 2003, p. 21). These forms of text are analysed in a way that provides an impression of how people make sense of things or events. If these sources are considered for interpretation and given some meanings, they can be called text in textual analysis. This means that text is something that is analysed for the production of meanings (McKee, 2003). Considering this, textual analysis can be defined as a method in which a researcher collects information concerning how people make sense of the world, interprets, or analyses it and attaches some meanings to it based on the research question. It is a method that helps understand how members of various cultural backgrounds fit into the setting in which they are a part. This method is employed by researchers in various disciplines, such as cultural studies, media studies, communication studies, sociology, philosophy, and so on (McKee, 2003). The researcher tries to attach meanings to some selected text in textual analysis. The meanings can be given to the text in several ways, each being equally valid since it depends on the context in which the meaning is given to it. This means that the researcher considers everyone's interpretation as valid but does not rely on their meanings; instead, the researcher attaches his own meanings to this text based on the context of his analysis (VanderStoep & Johnston, 2009). Researchers use textual analysis in communication studies to explain and analyse audio-visual text. During the process, the researcher elucidates the text and its structure. However, prior to this, important matters for the researcher are selecting the appropriate text, acquiring it, and deciding which method to use in its analysis (Frey et al., 1999).

Internet Research 11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Methods-II After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the basic nuances of textual analysis methods; * Describe steps involved in textual analysis; and * Devise your own research question and methods under textual analysis method.
11.2 PERSPECTIVES OF TEXTUAL ANALYSIS
Central to textual analysis is meaning, which can be interpreted from various perspectives. There are three broad perspectives of textual analysis: the rhetorical perspective, the critical studies perspective, and the discourse analysis perspective. Each of these perspectives on meaning will yield a different interpretation of the text (VanderStoep & Johnston, 2009). a) The rhetoric perspective: This perspective involves employing language in exploring the interactions between the actual text, the producer of the text (an author), and the readers of the text (audience). Through this perspective, the researcher explains, analyses, interprets, and evaluates what is persuasive within the text(s). The rhetorical perspective assumes that texts always carry a kind of meaning with them that influences people. Vander Stoep and Johnston (2009) claim that those engaging with textual analysis believe texts influence people's beliefs, attitudes, and behaviours. However, the extent of such an influence is always unknown. They further believe that culture is experienced through text, and through the analysis of cultural texts, we understand our traditions, values and even our identity (Vander et al., 2009). Rhetorical perspective serves important functions in textual analysis. It focuses on the persuasive ideas within the text and aids in understanding historical, social, and cultural contexts. Through this perspective, society can be evaluated by social criticism. One important function of rhetorical perspective is the pedagogical function, which teaches people what persuasion is and how it works (Andrews, 1983). b) Critical studies perspective: The critical studies perspective is common among researchers from various disciplines, such as media and communication studies, cultural studies, sociology, and philosophy. In this perspective, the text is seen as a place of power struggle. All popular culture media content, such as films, news, music, etc., carries messages which reveal who has power and who does not. Researchers explore texts through the critical studies perspective to see open and hidden domination and bias. There is always an idea underlying the text that creates and strengthens some specific group's power. Through this perspective, a researcher examines how ideas and dominance are expressed in language. The critical studies perspective involves investigating language in texts to show how

particular phenomena in languages (such as selection of words, structure of sentences, metaphors, strategies, etc.) are used to represent a particular viewpoint. Through this perspective, the researcher binds analysis of language with different contexts, such as social, historical, and political contexts (Baker et al., 2013). c) Discourse analytic perspective: The discourse analytic perspective entails understanding a phenomenon by interpreting discussions and narratives. What lies at the base of this perspective is that meanings are given to a discussion through the analysis of communicative action. Vander Stoep and Johnston (2009) have mentioned two specific kinds of analysis: conversational and narrative. Conversational analysis, as an approach, is used to study human interaction in society. It entails the interpretation of discourse taking place in a natural environment. Through this approach, verbal, written or physical communications (sometimes the behaviour of those engaging in discourses) are analysed to examine the structure of conversations as well as the functions that a particular utterance serves (Vander et al., 2009; Gee & Handford, 2012). On the other hand, narrative analysis involves analysing naturally occurring storytelling. In this type of analysis, the researcher starts using a "set of principles and seeks to exhaust the meaning of the text using specified rules and principles but maintains a qualitative textual approach" (Lune & Berg, 2017, p. 186). Through narrative analysis, the researcher explores the story's structure and how stories help in community building, forming, and maintaining relationships, establishing identities and values and so on (VanderStoep and Johnston,
2009) .
Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Describe the benefits and drawbacks of textual analysis?

2. Enumerate the applications of textual analysis in digital media studies?

Internet Research 11.3 TYPES OF TEXT AND METHODS OF
Methods-II
COLLECTION
In textual analysis, two text types are primary and secondary. The primary text comprises original information collected for analysis by the researcher. It includes the text collected for the first time by the researcher, considering the research objectives. Several methods are employed to collect primary data, but in textual analysis, two common methods of primary text collection are interviewing and observation. On the other hand, the secondary text includes the text used for the descriptive study, which helps to understand the primary text or clarify its analysis. Secondary text includes the reference works selected from existing literature, such as articles, lectures, published research works, etc. These sources are commonly termed documents (Bauer et al., 2014; Sahu, 2013). a) Interviewing: Interviewing is one of the most common methods of data collection in social sciences, media and communication studies, and behavioural sciences. It involves listening skills on the interviewer's part, wherein the interviewer records the interviewee's responses. These recorded responses are later transcribed into a text stream (Bauer et al., 2014). This means that in the interview method, communication takes place orally. In the interview method, the interviewer asks different questions to the respondents and records their responses. Interviews are of three types - personal interview, telephonic interview and chatting (Sahu,
2013) . Personal interviews are face-to-face interviews conducted at
places convenient to the respondents, such as the respondents' houses or office locations. They are costly, but they enable the respondents to obtain clarifications when the questions are unclear and allow the interviewer to follow up when the responses are incomplete (Shaughnessy et al., 2012). In telephonic interviews, respondents are contacted over the telephone, questions are asked, and responses are recorded. Through telephonic interviews, a researcher can have access to respondents who are spread over a large geographical area at a low cost, unlike personal interviews. In this type of interview, the respondents enjoy greater anonymity, encouraging them to be fair and honest in their responses without any influence from the interviewers' physical presence. The third type is chatting, which has become the most popular way of interviewing people and collecting their responses. Chatting is the exchange of words or communication between two or more persons through the Internet. People can communicate their ideas, thoughts, and beliefs to the interviewer through chat, even in the remotest places. Chatting can be of three types - written, audio and video chat. Through written chats, responses are collected in the form of text. In audio chats, responses are collected through audio recording devices, which are later transcribed into texts. With the advancement of technology, researchers are relying on various phone applications and video recording devices during interviews to collect data (Crano& Brewer, 2002).

b) Observation Observation collects primary information, such as people, behaviour, or other events in each setting. Researchers observe how people interact in a given setting, communicate, and deal with events through this method. These observations are recorded in a variety of forms, such as photographs, audio, and videos, which are later converted into text by the researcher. However, observation does not involve only vision; all our senses are to be used while collecting text through observation (Fox,
1998) . As such, the observation method can be used in two ways:
participant and unobtrusive. Participant observation, having its roots in anthropology and sociology, is a method of data collection in which a researcher becomes part of the group or community under study. The researcher interacts with the people in their social environment and notes, recording voices and other sounds, clicking pictures, and asking questions to the group members, which helps unfold the meanings behind various texts (Driscoll, 2011). Three important elements of participant observation are gaining access to the setting, building rapport with the participants, and spending longer time within the group. The first is gaining access to the setting, which entails researchers' admission into the study setting. This setting could be a group, a community, homes, places of work, play fields, commercial entities, sacred places, media institutions, etc. The second element is building rapport. Rapport building means establishing a warm relationship with the participants. The relationships must be built on trust and acceptance for fair responses from the participants. The third is spending longer periods within the group. This is the nature of participant observation, which requires the observer to spend around a year or more within the group to have larger conversations with the participants and better understand the group, people, events, and situations concerning the group. However, the amount of time spent in the group depends on the nature of the research. Thus, the time may vary from a few days to weeks to months and even years. This also involves multiple visits by the observer. The other is unobtrusive observation. It is a kind of covert observation in which the observer does not necessarily interact with the participants but only records their actions within the setting, such as their interaction and conversation with other group members, their behaviour, and so on. Most often, participants volunteer to be part of the research during observation, but in unobtrusive observation, participants are unaware that they are being observed (Troike, 2003). c) Documents Using primary sources by researchers in textual analysis poses certain challenges in critically analysing it, such as critical thinking, interpreting the text, finding a link between various texts, etc. Using documents included in the secondary data is key to enhancing our understanding or knowledge about the issue. These documents are made available by various sources such as academia, government establishments, private

Internet Research organisations, business companies, media sectors, researchers, or other Methods-II voluntary organisations. The documents made available by these sources include research papers/articles, booklets, books, journals, magazines, yearly reports, census reports, other technical reports, and so on (Sahu,
2013) . However, researchers must ascertain the originality of these
documents before utilising them. Now, documents can be available in visual and alphabetical text. Visual texts include graphics, maps, images, videos, etc. Alphabetical texts include anything in the secondary data and are available in written form. Thus, there are diverse documents produced by other researchers in their contexts but used in textual analysis in an entirely different context. Historians introduced documents as evidence of past events, but their use is widespread, especially in social sciences, media, and communication studies (Bauer et al., 2014).
11.4 PRESENTING TEXTUAL ANALYSIS
One of the best ways of presenting the findings of textual analysis is to consider the audience, whom you will present it, and the objectives of the analysis. As such, the analysis of texts is presented in three stages -the introduction, the body, and the conclusion. The introduction must be written to grab the readers' attention and provide necessary information about the objectives of textual analysis, the methods of text collection, and the ways of analysing and interpreting the text and the audience. It must also provide information about the kind of text that was analysed. The second stage is the body. This involves the interpretation and analysis of the text. All the text collected for analysis is scrutinised so that the researcher tries to locate the emerging themes within the texts, which are later utilised in different sections throughout the writing process. Different text forms, as discussed earlier, are utilised in this stage. Each chapter describes the link between the text and the researchers' analysis. At the start of each chapter, the main theme of the chapter is discussed, followed by the original text and then the researchers' interpretation of the specific quotes from the text, which connects the analysed text with the original quotes. Visuals are also used during the analysis. The third stage is the conclusion. In this section, all the findings of the analysis are collected and presented persuasively. The researcher must take the utmost care in bringing new information to the conclusion stage. However, the researcher must ensure that all the information presented earlier will provide readers with sufficient information to satisfy their needs (Hoey,
2001) .
Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Briefly explain the different kinds of textual analysis

2. Describe the steps involved in presenting findings of textual analysis.

Bibliography:
1. Andrews, J. R. (1983). The practice of rhetorical criticism, Collier
Macmillan Baker, P., Gabrielatos, C. & McEnery, T. (2013) Discourse analysis and media
2. attitudes: The representation of Islam in the British press, Cambridge
University Press
3. Bauer, M.W., Suerdem, A.K.&Bicquelet, A. (2014). Text analysis: An
introductory manifesto. In, M. W. Bauer, A. Bicquelet and A. K. Suerdem(eds.) Textual analysis: Sage benchmarks in social research methods, (pp. xxi-xlvii) London, UK: Sage
4. Crano, W. D. & Brewer, M. B. (2002). Principles and methods of social
research
5. (2ndEdition), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
6. Driscoll, D. L. (2011). Introduction to Primary Research: Observations,
Surveys, and Interviews. In Charles Lowe and Pavel Zemliansky (Eds.) Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing, Volume 2(pp. 160-161) Parlor Press
7. Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing discourse: Textual analysis for social
research, London, NY: Routledge
8. Fox, N. (1998). How to use observations in a research project, Sheffield:
Trent Focus Group
9. Frey, L., Botan, C., & Kreps, G. (1999). Investigating communication:
An introduction to research methods, (2nd ed.), Boston: Allyn& Bacon
10. Gee, J. P.&Handford, M. (2012). The Routledge Handbook of Discourse
Analysis, London, NY: Routledge
11. Hoey, M. (2001). Textual Interaction: An introduction to written
discourse analysis, London, NY: Routledge
12. Lune, H. & Berg, B. L. (2017). Qualitative Research Methods for the
Social Sciences, Pearson
13. McKee, A. (2003). Textual analysis: A beginner's guide. London: Sage.
14. Sahu, P. K. (2013). Research Methodology: A guide for researchers in
agricultural science, social science and other related fields, India: Springer
15. Shaughnessy, J. J., Zechmeister, E. B. &Zechmeister, J. S. (2012).
Research Methods in Psychology (9th Ed.), McGraw-Hill
16. Troike, M. S. (2003). The Ethnography of Communication: An
Introduction (3rd Edition). Blackwell Publishing
17. VanderStoep, S. W.& Johnston, D. D. (2009). Research methods for
everyday life: Blending qualitative and quantitative approaches. Wiley: Jossey-Bass

Internet Research 11.5 LET US SUM UP
Methods-II In this Unit, you learnt about textual analysis as a research method and how the method is employed for the analysis of the text. What texts are and what the different forms of text used in textual analysis are elucidated in this Unit. Every researcher adopts a perspective while engaging in textual analysis. Three different perspectives of analysing text are discussed in detail. On a broader note, two text sources are used in textual analysis, and there are different text forms under these two sources. This Unit mentions and details the methods used to collect text from these two broader sources. Finally, the procedure to present the textual analysis is bifurcated in three parts and elucidated in the last section. This Unit will guide the students who engage in textual analysis in various disciplines, especially social sciences and media and communication studies.
11.6 FURTHER READINGS
1. Gourlay, L., Hamilton, M., & Lea, M. R. (2014). Textual practices in the
new media digital landscape: Messing with digital literacies. Research in Learning Technology, 21(4). https://oro.open.ac.uk/39372/2/ Messing% 20 with%20digital%20literacies.pdf
2. Gunther, E., & Quandt, T. (2018). Word counts and topic models:
Automated text analysis methods for digital journalism research. In Rethinking research methods in an age of digital journalism (pp. 75-88). Routledge.
3. Ignatow, G. (2016). Theoretical foundations for digital text analysis.
Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 46(1), 104-120. https://www.dhi.ac.uk/san/waysofbeing/data/data-crone-ignatow-
2016. pdf
4. Patton, D. U., Blandfort, P., Frey, W. R., Schifanella, R., McGregor, K.,
& Chang, S. F. U. (2020). Vatas: An open-source web platform for visual and textual analysis of social media. Journal of the Society for Social Work and Research, 11(1), 133-155.5. Saura, J. R., Palacios-Marques, D., & Ribeiro-Soriano, D. (2023).
Exploring the boundaries of open innovation: Evidence from social media mining. Technovation, 119, 102447. https://www.sciencedirect. com/ science/article/pii/S0166497221002285
11.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Textual analysis offers deep insights into meaning, context, and cultural
significance within texts, aiding in understanding societal trends and ideologies. It allows researchers to uncover implicit messages, symbolism, and discourse structures, facilitating critical interpretation. However, it may be subjective, time-consuming, and reliant on researcher interpretation, potentially leading to bias and limited

generalizability.
2. Textual analysis finds diverse applications in digital media studies,
including analysing online content for sentiment analysis, understanding audience engagement through comment sections, identifying patterns in social media discourse, examining linguistic features in online communication, and evaluating the impact of digital storytelling techniques on audience perceptions and behaviours. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Textual analysis encompasses various methods for interpreting and
understanding written or spoken texts. Content analysis involves quantifying textual data to identify patterns or themes. Discourse analysis examines language use within social contexts to uncover underlying ideologies. Semiotic analysis explores symbols and signs to reveal deeper meanings encoded within texts.
2. First, organise the findings by themes or patterns identified during
analysis. Then, provide textual evidence to support each finding, including quotes or examples from the text. Next, contextualise the findings within relevant theoretical frameworks or literature. Finally, draw conclusions and implications based on the analysed data, highlighting significant insights.

UNIT 12 ONLINE ETHNOGRAPHY
Methods-II Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 Introduction to Ethnography
12.2.1 Traversing Digital Landscape
12.2.2 Need for Online Ethnography
12.3 Methods of Online Ethnography
12.3.1 Qualitative Methods
12.3.2 Quantitative Methods
12.4 Advantages and Disadvantages
12.5 Ethics and Responsibilities
12.6 Let Us Sum Up
12.7 Keywords
12.8 Further Readings
12.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
12.0 INTRODUCTION
In this Unit, you will be introduced to one of the most engaging research methods: Ethnography, the study of human communities. In the era of computer-mediated communication, we will discuss how online communities are adapting from and slowly replacing offline communities. We will then explore the need to study these communities and look at how ethnography has been adapted for online spaces. Going further, we will also discuss various methods of conducting online ethnography, ranging from qualitative to quantitative, and which cases warrant which method of data collection. Lastly, we will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of online ethnography as a research method and consider the code of ethics applied to digital ethnographers.
12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Describe Ethnography as a research practice; * Adapt Ethnography for the digital space; * Identify the research methodologies associated with Online Ethnography and * Appreciate the ethics and responsibilities of an online ethnographer.

12.2 INTRODUCTION TO ETHNOGRAPHY
Ethnography You may have read about travellers in ancient times who visited faraway lands on foot and recorded their accounts of the different places, cultures, customs, and traditions in their written memoirs. Chinese traveller Fa-Hien visited India in 405 AD, visiting the Buddhist communities in various cities and even learning Sanskrit to understand the culture. On the other hand, Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta visited India in the early 14th century, and his account is full of tales of bandits in the hinterlands. Their written accounts were the first to document the vast Indian culture, the courts of erstwhile kings and the traditions of the society through an alien eye. While Ethnography had not developed as a research methodology back then, the books written by these travellers chronicled the culture of a community from an outsider's perspective, which is basically what Ethnography stands for today. To put it precisely, Ethnography is the study of human communities and their indigenous cultures. It involves observation of individual behaviour and the collective reaction of the community, which forms longstanding cultural practices. Each community has its own set of norms and beliefs and moral code of practice forming the law of the land. The community elders usually set the code, and the younger population abides by it. Behaviour not accepted by the community usually leads to punishment or, in extreme cases, banishment of sorts. In this case, the researcher or the ethnographer joins a particular community to study. He/she then employs various methods to gain information about it. Think of scientists spending years in a forest, observing a native tribe, and gathering data to know more about them. The data may include a brief history of the community, starting from its origins to evolution, to estimating the impact of the geographical and environmental conditions on the rituals and practices of the community and the emerging indigenous beliefs and culture that define that community.
12.2.1 Traversing Digital Landscape
Technology is spreading its roots to many aspects of society. Communication, which forms the core of human experience, is also being mediated through technology. Be it a text message you receive or an email you send, it is a digital form of communication. Platforms on the Internet are not just being used to communicate with individuals but also within groups. Social media platforms facilitate various groups' assembling and communicating online. Digital Ethnography is a research method involving the exploration and study of communities assembled online with digital tools. These communities develop their social practices, contributing to a consolidated culture, much like the offline real-world communities. The people coming together to form these communities are not brought together due to their geographical proximity but rather due to common interests. The interests could range from sports to celebrities to science and education, and content based on these

Internet Research topics is posted and shared in the group. With time, these groups formulate Methods-II their dos and don'ts, applying to all participating individuals. These groups may include chat groups, group pages on social media, gaming communities, and other websites that allow for cross-user interaction. The researcher or the online ethnographer joins a virtual community, most hosted on social media. They then observe the practices and interactions between the participants within the community. He or she may also gather field notes and record them using a digital tool, in this case, like a word processor. On the other hand, quantitative data can be easily tabulated in Excel sheets. Instead of photographs, the researcher may save the weblink to a page, aided with a screenshot or screen recording. The web link is useful for accessing the information at the data analysis stage. However, noting the access date could also prove beneficial as the information is dynamic on the web and can be taken down. As a last resort, screenshots and screen recordings also prove beneficial later in the analysis. Collecting data in digital format helps in many ways. It is easy to archive without losing data quality and can be accessed and edited remotely. Several digital tools are also available for qualitative and quantitative analysis, such as social media analytics, data visualisation software, and qualitative analysis software. The data also becomes easier to handle and share with other collaborating researchers. It can also be digitally encrypted to ensure its safety. The researcher may also interact with the content posted in the community, posting comments to initiate a conversation with the users. Individual participants may be contacted based on their level and frequency of contribution to the community, and one-on-one interviews may be conducted to gather richer qualitative data. The interviews can be carried off the platform, to a video conferencing one, or even an offline space, in case the interviewee consents.
12.2.2 Need for Online Ethnography
The amount of time humans spend online has been increasing gradually over the years due to factors related to work or leisure. Thus, as a wider discipline, anthropology, the study of human beings, must also look at the digital vistas to expand itself. With the advent of the Internet and social media platforms, diverse online communities are mushrooming. These communities have been observed to nurture their unique norms and practices, much like their offline counterparts. Platformed on the World Wide Web, these communities attract a worldwide audience. They allow members from diverse geographical, economic, and social backgrounds to join and assimilate into the community, making them much more heterogeneous than offline communities. These platforms also offer varying levels of participation without the societal pressure to contribute. A person's contribution to an online community would be due to their interest, as it is a highly individualistic and personal activity. The users also have the option of anonymity. Thus, these communities also see uncensored participation compared to offline participation.

Social media platforms are also becoming highly instrumental in shaping Ethnography public opinions and forming cultural trends. Online Ethnography, thus, helps researchers understand online behaviour and practices. Studying human behaviour online would help not only gauge the influence of technology but also search for new avenues of market research. These communities also see seeds of social movements planted, and thus, Online ethnography could explore the issues and concerns of virtual populations as well. Digital ethnographers have also noted that social performances in online groups may differ from those in offline groups. This underlines the phenomenon that an individual's online persona differs from the offline one. Online ethnography can also help in understanding why this change occurs. An analysis of this sort is especially needed as computer-mediated communication is rapidly replacing the face-to-face format. Emergent online spaces such as manosphere also hint at a subaltern dormant in the offline spaces of society. It is still a matter of consideration whether online personalities should be studied as separate personas or as a continuation or result of offline personalities. All these factors denote a rising and pressing need for adapting the traditional ethnographic methods to suit the digital platforms and inhabiting virtual populations, resulting in the practice of Online Ethnography. Activity: 1 Join an online community based on any hobby or interests you may have. Figure out the avenues where you can gather information. You may have access to content posted in the public space. Frequency of posting, type of posts, frequency of reaction, and quality of reaction are a few things that you can observe. Identify the ways you can observe the participant interaction. List them down. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How are online communities different from offline communities?

2. What are the pros of collecting data in digital format?

Internet Research 12.3 METHODS OF ONLINE ETHNOGRAPHY
Methods-II You may remember your time in a classroom. You may recall observing your classmates and finding a few notorious backbenchers, disciplined frontbenchers, teacher's pets, and uninterested genius kids. How did you figure out their characteristics? You might have observed everything from their behaviour to their uniform to their interactions with classmates and teachers. Apart from the language and words, nonverbal aspects such as clothing, body language, and regularity in attending school would also be contributing factors while classifying or coding the students. What would be your 'thick description' of your class? Now imagine meeting all the classmates in a virtual group, all joining with their social media profiles. How would you identify them now? What will you be able to observe? What data points will you gather? Can you extract more or less information compared to meeting them offline? How would the 'thick description' vary in this case? Let us look at the ways data can be collected in the case of Online Ethnography. Firstly, the level of access available to the researcher may vary depending on the community. Some communities on the deep web may allow transparent access to all members, given their anonymity. In contrast, some other communities on accessible social media platforms may need an existing member's referral to gain access. Some researchers choose to be lurkers - or mere observance in the case of online groups. Lurkers do not interact with other participants of the group and rather just observe the interaction and other social practices. On the other hand, participant observation needs them to interact with the content posted in the group and with other participants. They have a prolonged engagement and become deeply immersed in the native community, much like their offline counterparts. Secondly, the interactions between the participants in online communities are largely based on textual exchange. As an online ethnographer, I find these texts provide most of the data to collect and analyse. Thus, recording and analysing the posts and comments becomes an integral part of digital ethnography. Thirdly, recording the communication between the participants and the researcher in the offline world may not be possible, although it is sometimes advisable. This makes referring back to the data impossible, as one needs to rely on memory, which can be prone to biases. In the case of an online interaction, it is mostly recorded and archived automatically, ready for referral as and when needed. Thus, online ethnography incorporates a range of methodologies to overcome the challenges posed by virtual populations. The choice of method depends on two major factors: the aim of the study and the availability of data.
12.3.1 Qualitative Methods
Qualitative methods elicit qualitative data. Simply put, this data is not represented in numbers but reflects on the qualities of the researched attributes. It is helpful when the researcher aims to understand human experiences, perspectives, and behaviour. A few methods associated with Online qualitative research are:

Participant Observation Method: In this method, the researcher joins in Ethnography and immerses themselves in the practices of the online community. They observe the emerging patterns and record them as 'Field notes'. At times, the observations are categorised according to codes pre-decided by the researcher, but most of the time, the researcher needs to be active and agile to gather unprecedented data as well. Observations and notes help consolidate the findings in a 'thick description' of the community. The observations could be made on types of social media profiles, types of posts, types of interaction incited by the posts, and the traffic generated on the page. Participant observation helps find discrepancies between what is said and what is seen as a practice in the community. Online Interviews: Online interviews are much like their offline counterparts; they are one-to-one conversations only mediated through a computer. They could be conducted through Instant Messaging or Chat, email, and Audio/Video calling over the web. These interviews help gather data on a participant's views and habits in an online space. They are also helpful in gathering any form of data that cannot be observed and needs to be elicited from individuals. They also shed light on the form of communication practised in the group. There are two basic types of online interviews: Synchronous interviews are those where questions and responses are conducted simultaneously. Both interviewer and interviewee are present online at the same time. In this case, the interviewer can base their questions on the responses garnered. There is more spontaneity in the process, thus eliciting more candid data. On the other hand, asynchronous interviews are those where interviewer and interviewee can participate as and when one is free. While providing freedom of time, these interviews give the interviewee time to respond to the questions after giving them due thought. These interviews elicit more formal data, as deliberation and thought have been put into the conversation. Online Content Analysis: This method is also called Online Textual analysis; like its offline counterpart, it includes gathering and analysing the online content through extensive coding. As discussed earlier, most communication is text-based in the online sphere. Thus, the researcher can analyse the posts, comments and other forms of text posted by the community users. Sampling can be tricky for online content, as the universe is vast and ever- expanding. In this case, one must filter the data intensively to extrapolate and analyse. Also, the data is dynamic in this case. The person posting may edit it later or remove it altogether. Thus, the key analysis factors must also be in place much before the researcher starts to work, offering less spontaneity and greater planning than offline ethnography. Online Focus Group Discussions: Like the offline counterpart, a Focus Group Discussion involves a researcher interacting with a group of pre- screened respondents qualified to represent the research sample. In the online format, the researcher needs to establish a base with all the respondents and set an online meeting time that suits all of them. Choosing a time to suit all

Internet Research can be problematic, given that the online communities have members living Methods-II in different time zones. Prepared with points to discuss, the researcher may conduct the discussion in a group chat, using text, or in audio-video format using video conferencing platforms. Offline Participant Observation: After gathering the available data online, the researcher may move the data collection to the physical world to consolidate the research. The researcher may try to conduct a face-to-face interview with the samples and observe their body language, dressing habits, environment, etc., as well, a feat impossible in the virtual world. Like offline ethnography, the more comfortable the respondent feels, the more information can be gathered and the richer the data will be.
12.3.2 Quantitative Methods
Web Usage Mining: Web Usage Mining or Data Mining is the process of extracting and analysing data from the web to study emerging patterns. Various types of tools are available today to make data extraction an automated process. According to some researchers, data mining is a misnomer because the activity aims not just to extract the data but to analyse it to identify emerging patterns that meet the research objectives. The process usually involves five major steps:
1. Selection of data--The researcher identifies the data sets needed for the
study. These could include comments on a post, details of user profiles, and even the movement of web traffic from one website to another.
2. Data pre-processing: The data is then brought into a format suitable for
analysis according to the available tools.
3. Coding of data - The data is now classified and segmented into various
categories for analysis.
4. Pattern assessment - Patterns are studied in the classified and coded
data. These patterns are analysed again with the help of useful statistical tools.
5. Findings - The findings are now summarised and applied to the broader
universe of the sample. Social Network Analysis: Social Networks are intricate webs of people connected, sometimes through an acquaintance, sometimes through a colleague or even a distant cousin. Social Network Analysis is the analysis of structures of relationships within an online community. Simply put, it studies how humans are connected in the web world. This analysis helps identify common nodes and points to the opinion leaders of the group. This also helps in etching out the patterns of acceptance and popularity and, thus, the connection emerging within the group. Studying these patterns is instrumental in discovering how information is circulated within a group. The findings are usually represented through a graphical representation known as sociograms, with people represented as nodes and lines connecting them. Online Content Analysis: Quantitative Content Analysis on the web works 204 by extracting the content, coding the data sets, and then applying statistical

tools to them for analysis. Several tools can automate the process, as the data Ethnography sets are huge in this case. Imagine if you had to manually code every comment an article on a popular news website would generate! The data could be text-based, visual/graphic-based, or even audio-visual. Thus, the tools required to analyse the data would also differ. A combination of all these tools and the qualitative ones is known as Multimodal analysis. Activity: 2 Let us return to the community you joined in the previous section. Now explore the type of content posted on the group, the reactions it accumulates, and the frequency. Record your field notes in digital format for a week. Check which posts gather more traffic compared to the ones that do not. At the end of the week, check what conclusions you can draw for the community. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are the two types of online interviews?

2. What are the processes involved with data mining?

12.4 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
As with any other research method, digital ethnography also has to offer its advantages and disadvantages to the researchers who opt for it. Let us discuss a few of the advantages first:
1. Global reach: The web can now be accessed from any corner of the
world. While the cost of connecting to the Internet may vary, it has become a staple across social classes. Thus, the virtual population is not limited to any geographical area but is spread across physical, economic, and social boundaries.

Internet Research 2. Flexibility in data: While on the one hand, the researchers can access Methods-II archives on the web to access data from the past, on the other hand, they can also witness real-time conversations and gather real-time data. In this case, one is also able to compare the data from the past and present.
3. Versatility in data: Data can be gathered in any format, from text to
visual to audio files, each warranting a different analysis tool and method. This also allows the researcher to access qualitative as well as quantitative data.
4. Economical: Using digital tools to study online communities proves to
be much more cost-effective. It saves considerably on the budget for offline travelling, lodging, and spending time in the field.
5. Data preservation: Data can be saved and accessed easily for future
reference. There is no generation loss in copying the data, and by storing it digitally, it is safe from physical harm.
6. Ease of research: One can interact with anyone from their home without
disturbing the community. Another factor is that one may stand out from the community due to their physical appearance in the real world. Still, in the case of online communities, physical appearance can be very well hidden. Think of how you would stand out from a native African tribe in Kenya if you wanted to study them and how your appearance would affect your interactions with that community.
7. Cross-platform access: Unlike in the real world, cyber ethnography can
also help the researcher track a community member outside that community. Using profile information, usernames, and email addresses, the researcher can identify key members and track their activities on other social media platforms and websites. Despite so many advantages, the method also has some disadvantages as well:
1. Computer skills--the researcher needs to have at least basic computer
skills to start Digital Ethnography. But the more they know, the better tools they can manage, like data mining software, and elicit richer data.
2. Temporal nature of online data--The data does not remain status in
the case of onion space. The researcher needs to keep their own records in case it is removed later.
3. Fighting the algorithm--The algorithm on social media websites tracks
your content preferences and curates the content it thinks you may like. This could bias your feed immensely and show you only a fraction of the content that exists.
4. Bias of the participants--Like other community participants, the
researcher also needs to create an online avatar or profile to start interacting with other users. In this case, your choice of image and the information you provide can affect the participants' behaviour towards you, thus affecting your data.

5. Privacy concerns--Digital Researchers disagree regarding the concept
Ethnography of personal and public on the Internet. Each website takes a different approach to the content posted by users on their public platforms. It becomes the researcher's responsibility to make sure the participants are informed that they are being studied and their consent is obtained when using their content as data.
6. Electronic eavesdropping - many researchers opine that online
ethnography is nothing but eavesdropping on individuals using technological tools.
7. No clear set of guidelines--Due to the rapid succession of technology
and thus updates in web platforms, no clear set of guidelines has yet been established by any authoritative bodies. A broad framework has been curated by AoIR (Association of Internet Researchers), but there is no abiding factor connected to it.
12.5 ETHICS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
While allowing for anonymity and a covert functioning method, digital ethnography comes with its ethics. Following are a few of the set rules and responsibilities to be followed by an ethnographer:
1. Consent--The researcher needs to ensure that the participants know that
they are being observed. Researchers suggest creating a profile that clearly states the purpose or posting this information on your profile page so that it is in the public space.
2. Privacy--If the researcher stumbles upon information that the individual
may not want to be publicised, they should respect their right to privacy, withhold the information, and not make it part of their research.
3. Secure data handling--data pertaining to individuals should be handled
safely and should not compromise an individual's safety. There are several digital tools available to encrypt your data for safer handling, and they should be used.
4. Respecting community norms--each community has its own set of
rules. A researcher should not act disruptively and should abide by the community guidelines.
5. Avoid bias - an individual can't be completely devoid of bias. However,
it is good practice for a researcher to be aware of their own biases and avoid them while observing, collecting data, and writing a report for scientific research. Like any other research method dealing with respondents, ethnography also calls for the researcher to be mindful, responsible, and respectful towards all being observed, even if they may disagree with them individually. Following these practices enriches the data and, thus, the study.

Internet Research Check Your Progress: 3
Methods-II Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are the various advantages of online ethnography?

2. List a few responsibilities of an online ethnographer.

12.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, you were introduced to Ethnography as a research practice. You were taken through the features of the digital landscape and learnt how Ethnography is adapted for virtual populations. We also covered various methods of Digital Ethnography, ranging from Qualitative to Quantitative, and pondered the advantages and disadvantages of each method. Lastly, we discussed the ethics and moral code associated with Ethnography and how it adapts to digital platforms.
12.7 KEYWORDS
Cyberculture: Culture of a group or community formed with the help of digital technologies. Cyberspace: Non-physical environment, which enables individuals to interact with each other using digital tools Mobile Ethnography: This type of ethnography where mobile becomes the primary tool for observation and data collection. Field notes: A compilation of observations made by the researcher while observing the community. Informed consent: Consent obtained from the participants being observed after explaining the purpose of the study. Online Community: a group of people congregating in the online space, bound by certain values. Sociogram: Graphical representation of findings of Social Network Analysis

12.8 FURTHER READINGS
Ethnography
1. Hine, C. (2008). Virtual ethnography: Modes, varieties, affordances. The
SAGE handbook of online research methods, 257-270.2. Kozinets, R. V. (2015). Netnography: redefined. Sage.
3. Madden, R. (2022). Being ethnographic: A guide to the theory and
practice of ethnography. Being Ethnographic, 1-100.4. Srivastav, S., & Rai, S. (2022). Netnography in Social Networking Sites-
An Exploration of Cybercultures in Consumer Groups. International
Journal of Media and Information Literacy, 7(2), 572-577.5. Varis, P. (2015). Digital ethnography. In The Routledge Handbook of
Language and Digital Communication (pp. 55-68). Routledge.
12.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Online communities prove to be more heterogeneous than offline
communities, as they have members from diverse geographical, economic, and social backgrounds. With the option of anonymity, online communities see uncensored participation compared to offline ones. Lastly, participation in online communities is due to a person's interest and less peer pressure, as it is a highly individualistic activity.
2. Collecting data in digital format helps in many ways. It is easy to archive
without any loss in quality and can be accessed and edited from remote locations. There are also several digital tools available for qualitative and quantitative data analysis. The data also becomes easier to handle and share with other collaborating researchers. It can also be digitally encrypted to ensure its safety. Check Your Progress: 2
1. There are two types of online interviews: Synchronous and
Asynchronous. Synchronous Interviews are those where questions and responses occur simultaneously. Both interviewer and interviewee are present online at the same time. Asynchronous interviews allow the interviewer and interviewee to participate as and when free.
2. The process of data mining usually involves five major steps:
a. Selection of data b. Pre-processing of data c. Classification of data d. Pattern assessment e. Reporting the findings

Internet Research Check Your Progress: 3
Methods-II
1. The following are the advantages of Online Ethnography as a research
method. a. Global reach b. Flexibility in data c. Versatility in data d. Economical e. Data preservation f. Ease of researcher g. Cross-platform access
2. The responsibilities of an ethnographer include:
a. Obtaining the consent of the participants b. Ensuring the privacy of the individuals c. Handling data securely d. Respecting the norms of the community studied e. Avoid bias in data collection and reporting

UNIT 13 NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 History and Definition of Narrative Analysis
13.3 Functions of Narrative Analysis
13.4 Social Dimensions of Narrative
13.5 Collecting Narratives
13.6 Analysing Narratives
13.7 An example of narrative analysis
13.8 Let Us Sum Up
13.9 Further Readings
13.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
13.0 INTRODUCTION
Narrative lies at the heart of being human (Byatt, 2000). It pervades our everyday life. We are born into a narrative world, live our lives through narratives, and afterwards are described in terms of narrative. Narratives concern the human means of making sense of an ever-changing world. It is through narrative that we can begin to define ourselves as having some sense of temporal continuity and as distinct from others.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this module, you should be able to * Know about the definition and history of narrative analysis. * Learn the functions and social dimensions of narrative analysis * Learn about how to analyse narratives.
13.2 HISTORY AND DEFINITION
According to narrative theory (Murray, 1999 & Sarbin, 1986), we are born into a storied world and live our lives through the creation and exchange of narratives. A narrative can be defined as an organised interpretation of a sequence of events. This involves attributing agency to the characters in the narrative and inferring causal links between the events. In the classic formulation, a narrative is an account with three components: a beginning, a middle and an end. Unlike an open-ended piece of discourse, a narrative has a finished structure. (Murray, 1999 & Sarbin, 1986).
History of Narrative Psychology
Within psychology, three classic texts marked the specific narrative turn.

Internet Research 1. Narrative Psychology: The Storied Nature of Human Conduct, edited Methods-II by Theodore Sarbin (1986). This collection amounted to a manifesto for the transformation of psychology. He summarised the implications of this alternative model: When we give accounts of ourselves or others, we are guided by narrative plots. Whether for formal biographies or autobiographies, psychotherapy, self-disclosure, or entertainment, we do much more than catalogue a series of events. Rather, we render the events into a story. Narratives are not just ways of seeing the world; we actively construct the world through narratives and live through the stories told by others and by ourselves. They have ontological status. The book edited by Sarbin (1986) also contains a chapter by Ken and Mary Gergen (1986), arguing that narratives are social constructions developed in everyday social interaction. They are a shared means of making sense of the world. Gergen and Gergen, 1984 identified three structures that organised many narratives -progressive, in which there is a movement towards the goal; regressive, in which the reverse occurs; and stable, in which there is little change.
2. Acts of Meaning by Jerome Bruner (1990) followed his earlier
Actual Minds: Possible Worlds (Bruner, 1986). In these books, Bruner argued that there are two forms of thinking: the paradigmatic and the narrative. The former is the scientific method based on classification and categorization. The alternative narrative approach organises everyday interpretations of the world in storied form. Bruner identified several defining properties of narrative, including the following: * It is composed of a unique sequence of events, mental states, and happenings that involve human beings as characters or actors. * It can be 'real' or 'imaginary'. * It specialises in the forging of links between the exceptional and the ordinary. These properties help us understand narrative as a way of constructing reality, of making sense of something obscure or unusual.
1. Narrative Knowing and the Human Sciences by Donald Polkinghorne
(1988). The book's most important feature was the opening of hermeneutic philosophy, particularly the work of Paul Ricoeur, to more widespread discussion within psychology. In his classic work Time and Narrative, Ricoeur (1984) argued that since we live in a temporal world, we must create narratives to bring order and meaning to the constantly changing flux. Not only do we create narratives about the world, but narratives are also central to how we conceive of ourselves and our identity. Through narrative, we not only construct a particular connectedness in our actions but also distinguish 212 ourselves from others.

During the 1980s and 1990s, the study of narrative became much more extensive within various fields of psychology within personality and human development studies; Dan McAdams (1985) argued that narrative is central to our self-definition. Within clinical psychology, there was a movement towards developing narrative therapy (Mair, 1989 & Neimeyer, 1995) based on exploring alternative stories. Of particular note, the study of narrative within psychology encouraged the growth of greater contact with the humanities (Fulford, 1999 & Joy, 1997) and with the other social sciences (Maines, 1993).
13.3 FUNCTION OF NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
According to Jonathan A. Smith, there are three functions of narrative analysis, which are as follows: The primary function of narrative is that it brings order to disorder. In telling a story, the narrator tries to organise the disorganised and give it meaning. The use of narrative is particularly pronounced in everyday understandings of disruption (Becker, 1997). We all encounter disruptions to our everyday routines. Such disruptions include personal, family, financial, and health problems. These challenges to our daily routines encourage attempts by us to restore some sense of order. Narrative is the primary means of restoring this sense of order. The need to restore a sense of order following disruption is especially pronounced in Western society, which is bounded by order and rationality. Gaylene Becker (1997) has argued that Western ideas about the life course emphasise linearity. Living in such a world, we try to make sense of inconsistencies. (Becker, G.1997). Narratives not only bring order and meaning to our everyday lives but also structure our very sense of selfhood. We tell stories about our lives to ourselves and others. As such, we create a narrative identity. 'Subjects recognize themselves in the stories they tell about themselves' (Ricoeur,
1988) . Narrative identity connects to different social relationships. It also
provides a sense of localised coherence and stability. Through narrative, we begin to define ourselves and clarify the continuity in our lives. In constructing a personal narrative, we select certain aspects of our lives and connect them with others. This process of narrative identity formation is dynamic and occurs in a changing social and personal context. Ricoeur (1988) said, ' We learn to become the narrator of our own story without completely becoming the author of our life.' (Ricoeur, 1988).
13.4 SOCIAL DIMENSIONS OF NARRATIVES
Narrative accounts are not emitted in a vacuum but are encouraged and shaped by certain social contexts. However, the narrator tells the story, and the story's character will depend upon whom the story is being told to, the relationship between the narrator and the audience, and the broader social

Internet Research context (Murray, 1997). Although narrative is often considered in individual Methods-II terms, one can also consider group, community, or social narratives. These are the narratives that collectives talk about themselves, their histories, and aspirations. As personal narratives are involved in creating personal identities, the social narratives define the history of a collective and distinguish it from other collectives. Further, these collective narratives overlap with personal narratives so individuals can define themselves as part of the group (Murray, 2000). In sum, we are enmeshed in a narrative world; we understand our world and ourselves through narrative. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the basic tenets of narrative analysis?

2. Enumerate the steps involved in narrative analysis?

13.5 COLLECTING NARRATIVES
The primary source of material for the narrative researcher is the interview. Unlike the traditional structured interview with details of questions to be answered, the narrative interview is designed to provide an opportunity for the participant to give a detailed narrative account of a particular experience. The life story interview is the most extended version of the personal narrative interview. As its name implies, a life-story interview aims to encourage the participants to provide an extended account of their lives. At the outset of the interview, the researcher will explain that the study aims to learn about the person's life. However, narratives are not just life stories in the most general sense but also stories about everyday experiences, especially disruptions of daily life. Given the time and the opportunity, participants are often willing to provide extended narrative accounts of different experiences. The challenge is for the researchers to convince the participants that they are interested in their narrative accounts. Thus, the researcher should reflect upon what the participants say and introduce supplementary questions designed to obtain clarification, such as, 'Why do you think that is the case?' or 'Could you give an example of that?' The interviewer can also use other methods

such as encouraging the participants to keep a personal journal to collect photographs or make a video. The aim is always to find a technique with which the participants are comfortable, and which will allow them to develop narrative accounts. The researcher should collect background material about the central participants and details about the interviewer. Such information is important when we begin to analyse the narrative accounts. A useful strategy is for the researcher to keep a detailed log of each interview. This could include some basic demographic details of the participant and when and where the interview occurred. (Smith, J.A. 2003).
13.6 ANALYSING NARRATIVES
The analysis of narrative accounts can be divided into two broad phases: * Descriptive * Interpretive A thorough reading of the narrative precedes both these phases. In reading the narrative accounts, the aim is to familiarise oneself with both their structure and their content. A useful strategy is to prepare a summary of the narratives that will identify the key features, such as the beginning, the middle and the end. The analyst can highlight key issues and discern subplots. In reading the summaries, it is then possible to begin to get an idea of what the main issues being raised are (Mishler, 1986). Through this process of close reading, a coding frame can be developed that can be applied to the various narratives. The coding frame is designed to capture the overall meaning of the narratives and the various issues raised within each. The second step is to connect the narrative with the broader theoretical literature used to interpret the story. Thus, the researcher goes beyond the descriptive phase to develop the interpretation. This requires a simultaneous familiarity with the narrative accounts and with the relevant literature such that one can begin to connect with the other. A particular concern in narrative analysis is how the narrative is structured or organised. Various schemes have been developed to convey the temporal quality of narratives. The three-fold classification scheme developed by Gergen and Gergen (1984) is a useful analytic tool, but it is important not to apply it in a schematic way but rather in a flexible manner to encapsulate the various shifts in any narrative account. For example, the tragic narrative begins with a progressive structure, but then, despite the struggle, the central character is overcome, and the narrative becomes regressive. This regression can be overcome by changing the broad interpretive dimensions used to frame the event. Gee (1991) described the value of exploring the poetic structure of popular narrative accounts. He argued that versus is an intrinsic part of everyday narrative accounting and that poetry is merely a more developed form of that accounting. In particular, he was concerned about using rhythm and metaphor

Internet Research in popular narratives. The study by Becker (1999) is an example of the Methods-II successful use of strategy to explore personal narratives. In reading through the pain narrative of an older adult, she noted that it had a certain poetic quality. She then recast the narrative account as a series of poetic stanzas with a similar structure. In recasting the narrative, the interviewer's questions are omitted, and the researcher organises the text into verses. This analysis requires attention to the overall rhythm underlying the narrative and the metaphors used to describe experiences. The researcher can also consider the personal, interpersonal, group and social contexts (Murray, 2000). The personal context is concerned with how narrative draws on the individual's experience; the interpersonal and group context considers the audience and the co-construction of the narrative, and the societal context considers the broader societal narratives which structure our everyday accounts. While it is difficult to integrate all these contextual levels into a single analysis attention to one or the other may be particularly important in understanding the structure of certain narrative accounts.
13.7 AN EXAMPLE OF NARRATIVES
An Example: A Breast Cancer Story
The example is taken from a study of how women handle the disruption of their lives because of having breast cancer (Murray, 2002). Researchers were interested in how the women integrated the disease into their everyday lives. Also, how stories were constructed in a particular social and interpersonal context; all the women interviewed had had surgery for breast cancer. There was no sign of recurrence at their last check-up, and they had agreed to be interviewed about the experience. For many of the women, the interview was an emotional experience. Several of them mentioned that they had had limited opportunity to discuss the operation with others. A summary of each of the narrative accounts was prepared. Certain commonalities in all the stories gave them the standard narrative structure.
1. Beginning: This was life before cancer. Different women emphasised
aspects of their lives - family life, marriage, work etc. The main thing was that cancer did not play a part in their lives.
2. Middle: A major part of the story centres on the diagnosis of cancer, the
surgery, and the reaction of the patient and that of their family or friends.
3. End: This involved looking back on the disruption in their lives, how
they began to redefine themselves as the survivors of the disease, and how their life expectations and experiences changed. Having developed the analysis of the narratives, we can then proceed to write a report grounded in the interviews. This example of a narrative account illustrates how people can use narratives to forge links between the exceptional and the ordinary (Bruner, 1990). When given an opportunity in the interview, the women were eager to provide detailed narrative accounts. In terms of structure, women's stories have a classic beginning, middle, and 216 end. The beginning sets the scene; the middle details the experience of breast

cancer, and the end concerns the impact of the disease on their lives. At the personal level of analysis, the narrative reflects the different experiences of the women. At the interpersonal level, the narrative analyst is interested in how the participant conveys her story to the interviewer. In her story, what issues does she emphasise? At the societal level, these narrative accounts mesh with the broader moral universes of women. From a moral perspective (Noblitt & Dempsey, 1996), narrative ties can be seen as tales of right and wrong and attempts to do the virtuous thing during times of challenge. Narrative research offers extensive opportunities and is still being developed. When conducting a study, researchers should ask what they are trying to understand, what the participants are trying to say, and why they are trying to say that. The aim is to reveal the underlying structure of narrative accounts that shapes not only the way we account for our actions and those of others but also our very identity. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Enumerate the advantages and disadvantages of narrative analysis?

2. Explain the application of narrative techniques in digital media research?

13.8 LET US SUM UP
At the core of human existence lies narrative, which serves as a fundamental tool for comprehending the dynamic nature of our surroundings. Through narrative, we construct a framework that allows us to establish a sense of continuity within our lives and delineate our individual identities amidst the diversity of human experiences. Narrative theory posits that from birth, we are immersed in a world woven with stories, and our existence unfolds through the crafting and sharing of narratives, which serve as organized interpretations of sequential events. These narratives play a pivotal role in imposing order upon chaos, thereby furnishing structure to our understanding of selfhood. Moreover, it's imperative to recognize that narrative accounts are not crafted in isolation but are deeply influenced by the social milieus in which they emerge and evolve. In the realm of narrative analysis, scholars undertake a dual approach, comprising descriptive and interpretive phases, to unravel the intricate layers of meaning embedded within these narratives.

Internet Research 13.9 FURTHER READINGS
Methods-II
1. Bamberg, M. (2020). Narrative analysis: An integrative approach.
Qualitative analysis: Eight approaches for the social sciences, 243-264.2. Bandeli, K. K., Hussain, M. N., & Agarwal, N. (2020). A Framework
towards Computational Narrative Analysis on Blogs. In Text2Story@
ECIR (pp. 63-69). https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2593/paper8.pdf
3. Cowger, T., & Tritz, J. (2021). Narrative analysis research: A tool for
extension educators. The Journal of Extension, 57(6), 1. https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1259&contex t=joe
4. Colussi, J., & Reis, T. A. (2020). Immersive journalism: a narrative
analysis in virtual reality apps. Revista latina de comunicacion social, (77), 19-32.5. Josselson, R., & Hammack, P. L. (2021). Essentials of narrative analysis.
American Psychological Association.
6. Pasquinelli, C., & Trunfio, M. (2020). Overtouristified cities: An online
news media narrative analysis. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 28(11), 1805-1824.13.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Narrative analysis examines stories to understand underlying meanings,
structures, and cultural contexts. It focuses on the narrative's construction, including plot, characters, and themes, and explores how narratives shape individual and collective identities, beliefs, and experiences. This approach acknowledges narratives as powerful tools for sense-making and communication in society.
2. Steps in Narrative Analysis:
1. Data Collection: Gather narrative texts, such as stories, interviews,
or media, relevant to the research question.
2. Familiarisation: Read or listen to narratives multiple times to
become familiar with content and context.
3. Coding: Identify recurring themes, characters, and plot elements
using coding techniques.
4. Pattern Recognition: Analyse coded data to identify patterns,
connections, and variations within narratives.
5. Interpretation: Interpret findings by considering cultural, historical,
and social contexts, and examining how narratives construct meaning and influence perceptions.
6. Validation: Validate interpretations through peer review, participant
feedback, or triangulation with other data sources.

Check Your Progress: 2
1. Narrative analysis offers deep insights into individual experiences and
societal discourses, allowing researchers to uncover complex meanings embedded within narratives. It facilitates understanding of cultural contexts and power dynamics. However, it can be time-consuming, subjective, and challenging to generalise findings beyond specific contexts.
2. In digital media research, narrative techniques are applied to analyse
user-generated content, online storytelling, and digital narratives. Researchers examine how individuals construct and share narratives through social media, blogs, and online forums. This approach helps understand identity formation, community building, and cultural expressions in digital environments.

Methods-II

Block
ANALYSING AND INTERPRETING DATA
UNIT 14
Fundamentals of Data Analysis
UNIT 15
Digital Data Analysis
UNIT 16
Data Interpretation
UNIT 17
Report Writing
UNIT 18
Ethics in Internet Research

BLOCK 4 INTRODUCTION
Methods-II In the first Block, you learned about the basics of Internet research. The subsequent two blocks are meant to help you understand different data collection tools. Now that the required data is being collected, this Block will help you understand the data analysis and interpretation process, professionally present your findings to a broader audience, and, more importantly, how to maintain ethical standards in your entire research journey.
Unit 14 Fundamentals of Data Analysis, where we learn about the core
concepts shaping modern research methodologies. We explore diverse research perspectives, from handling quantitative data to qualitative analysis techniques. We unravel the intricacies of organising, organising, summarising, and testing hypotheses, culminating in drawing robust conclusions through varied analytical strategies and approaches.
Unit 15 Digital Data Analysis explains the intricate world of data retrieval
and harvesting techniques within Digital Media Research Methods (DMRMs). Navigating the vast expanse of digital information empowers researchers to maintain focus and objectivity.
Unit 16 Data Interpretation discusses the fundamental principles of
statistics, exploring populations versus samples, scales of measurement, and types of variables. We'll navigate through frequency distribution, measures of central tendency, and variability, empowering you to interpret data confidently and precisely.
Unit 17 Report Writing explores the essential stages of crafting a
comprehensive report, from structuring the beginning with a captivating title to effectively presenting findings, including the main body and final components.
Unit 18 Ethics in Internet Research explains the fundamental principles of
research ethics and defines the research process. Exploring digital platforms as research sources, we'll scrutinise source credibility and maintain source confidentiality. Lastly, we'll assess the advantages and disadvantages of Internet research. These four Blocks of this course were designed to facilitate a better understanding of undertaking research on specific aspects of the digital media world. The ever-changing online platform would inspire you to explore nuances and understandings of human interactions.

UNIT 14 FUNDAMENTALS OF DATA
Data Analysis
ANALYSIS
Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Different Research Perspectives
14.3 Handling Quantitative Data
14.3.1 Organising and Coding Data
14.3.2 Descriptive Statistics
14.3.3 Summary Statistics
14.3.4 Descriptive Measures
14.4 Testing Hypotheses
14.5 Qualitative Data Analysis
14.6 Drawing Conclusion Through Data Analysis
14.6.1 Constant Comparative Technique
14.6.2 Analytical Induction Strategy
14.6.3 Generalising About Generalisation
14.6.4 Converging Practices and Approaches
14.7 Let Us Sum Up
14.8 Keywords
14.9 Further Readings
14.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
Data analysis involves processing raw data and converting it into information useful for users' decision-making. The data are analysed to answer questions, test hypotheses, and prove or disprove theories. The methods cover diverse operations of categorising, segmenting, and interpreting evidence, or data sets. The process of data analysis by the researcher begins when an entire set of data has been collected. Organising the data correctly can save a lot of time and prevent mistakes. Most researchers use a database or statistical analysis programme to format data to fit their needs and organise their data effectively. Each data analysis software has its requirements for how data are to be entered. A good researcher enters all the data in the same format and the same database, as doing otherwise might lead to confusion and difficulty with the statistical analysis later. Sometimes, there are issues of interoperability between different software. Once the data have been entered, the researcher must check the data for accuracy. This can be accomplished by spot-checking a random assortment of participant data groups. Still, this method is less effective than re-entering the data a second time and searching for

Analysing and discrepancies. This method is particularly easy to use when using numerical
Interpreting Data
data because the researcher can simply use the database programme to sum the spreadsheet's columns and then look for total differences. One of the best methods of accuracy checking is to use a specialised computer programme to cross-check double-entered data for discrepancies (as this method is error- free). However, these programs can be hard to come by and may require extra training. In this unit, we will focus on data analysis in research and the process of organising and coding data for effective analysis. We will also discuss how to distinguish between quantitative and qualitative data analysis so that you can apply appropriate data analysis techniques in your research work.
14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Describe the importance of data analysis in research; * Organise data for effective analysis; * Explain the importance of data analysis; * Distinguish between quantitative and qualitative data analysis; * Explain how to handle quantitative data; * Discuss how to handle qualitative data; and
14.2 DIFFERENT RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES
The understanding of the term' analyses has tended to divide qualitative and quantitative research traditions. In quantitative media studies, rule-governed procedures of segmenting and categorising the components of content form the basis of interpretation. On the other hand, qualitative studies typically emphasise meaning as a process unfolding in contexts. Using the words ' quantitative' or ' qualitative' can refer to a broad approach to the research problem, a methodology for the research and a defined set of research techniques. When we refer to quantification, the research analysis focuses on numbers and, in the case of content analysis, on measurable numerical values for 'space' and ' time'. These appear more systematic and replicable. Survey research also relies on greater quantification and greater measurement sophistication. However, this sophistication comes with a price: increasing quantification narrows the types of questions that can be addressed. This means that research depth is sacrificed to get research breadth. In quantitative data, we get a lot of findings that can be generalised to a larger population. In contrast, in qualitative data analysis, we get depth and underlying causes without being able to generalise to a larger population. For this reason, there is no commonly accepted definition of the term 'qualitative'. Qualitative research relies mainly on observations and verbal data that reflect everyday experiences. On the other hand, and consequently, qualitative data must be analysed differently.

Check Your Progress: 1
Data Analysis
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
A. Fill in the blanks:
1. is defined as the processing of collecting raw data and
converting it into information useful for users' decision-making.
2. The data is analysed to answer questions and tests. Or disprove
theories.
3. Once the data has been entered, the researcher must check the data
for Table: 4. In quantitative media studies, rule-governed procedures of, and , the components of content, form the basis of interpretation.
5. Qualitative research relies mainly on verbal data that reflects everyday
experiences.
14.3 HANDLING QUANTITATIVE DATA
Quantitative research methodologies generate numerical data. Surveys (whether of audiences or content) and experiments are the basic data collection methods. Once numerical data have been collected, they need to be analysed through statistical techniques. These mathematical techniques describe, organise, and explore relationships within the data. In epistemological terms, quantitative research is typically grounded in a hypothetico-deductive approach, in which investigators mount hypotheses or predictions about the expected associations or cause-effect relationships between variables. The quantitative data collection and analysis aim to produce findings that lead to the acceptance or rejection of a specified hypothesis. Numerical data analysis through statistical procedures represents a systematic and objective way of determining whether significant patterns of relationships exist among those phenomena that have been measured in data collection.
14.3.1 Organising and Coding Data
Numerical data is collected through survey questionnaires, content-coding frames, or experimental instruments. These must be systematically coded and entered a database for further analysis. This process of organising and coding data is a crucial part of the analysis process. This is where most inexperienced researchers tend to make mistakes. If there are errors here, they will be reflected in the problems faced while analysing data, making analysis difficult, if not impossible. The first stage of organising data is the creation of a coding manual. Often, researchers think that data can be entered directly into a database. While, yes, it can be entered, the coding manual anticipates any problems with entering, e.g.,

Analysing and When multiple answers are possible or when there are double-digit replies.
Interpreting Data
Simply stated, a coding manual is a set of instructions on how the data are to be tabulated. It is an extremely important document when organising data, especially if more than one person is entering data onto a coding sheet or database. You may ask what a coding manual looks like. A brief design is given below: Variable Numerical value Column Location 1) Rural 1
2) Semi-urban
3) Urban
9) No Answer
Sex 1) Male 2
2) Female
3) Transgender
9) No Answer
Level of Education 1) Illiterate 3
2) Up to 8th standard
3) Matriculate
4) High School
5) Graduate and Above
9) No answer
Note how one column is assigned to one variable. And since a single digit cannot exceed 9, 9 is the code for a 'no answer'. If there are more than nine possible answers to a question, assign two columns, with 99 for a 'no answer'. Sometimes, a question may have multiple answers because that is how it has been asked. Then, one column must be assigned for each possible answer. A sample coding sheet is provided in the Annexure. In a coding sheet, one row is assigned to one respondent. One or two columns (as the need may be) are assigned to a question or variable. Through this coding process, key variables can be identified easily, and errors, duplication, repetition, etc., can be addressed. Once the data are coded numerically entered a coding sheet, and transferred onto a computerised database, data can be checked for accuracy, and statistical tests can be performed. The accuracy with which the data transfer takes place and the application of statistical procedures that are appropriate for the data are crucial to the entire quantitative research work- errors in the early stages as it can skew or invalidate the results. Different software packages have different methods for entering data into columns. For instance, in Excel, it is possible to enter two numbers in one cell, separating them into 1 and 3. In SPSS, one cell in a column can have only one number. Follow the instructions of the software package in designing your coding manual and entering your data.

14.3.2 Descriptive Statistics
Data Analysis
Descriptive statistics are discussed in detail in Unit 14, and we will merely summarise different types of statistics here. Quantitative data analysis often begins by adopting a simple descriptive approach to establish initial patterns in the findings. For instance, a public opinion survey about the performance of elected political leaders might present data in percentages of respondents who agreed or disagreed that the political leaders were competent. In a further analysis, results can be described in terms of gender, age, social class, and political affiliations of the respondents. Such results can be visually displayed in a bar chart or summarised in a table. Some of the ways of displaying results are described. Another type of study might be conducting a survey to ask 1000 respondents to state how many hours they spend watching television each week. In this case, descriptive statistics can be applied to show how many respondents viewed nothing or less than an hour, between one to two hours and so on. Next, a frequency distribution could be generated, showing how the respondents were distributed across different viewing volumes. Such data can be visually represented in a line graph bar chart, or table.
14.3.3 Summary Statistics
Data can be further analysed in terms of summary statistics. Summary statistics measure two basic aspects of the distribution of ' scores or measurements in a data set: central tendency, dispersion, or variability. A central tendency measure indicates which out of a range of scores is the 'typical' one. This typical score in tum can be defined in three different ways: a) The mode is the most frequently occurring in a range of scores. For example, if in a set of ten scores, five score '4', three score '2 ', and two score' 1', the mode is 4. b) The median score is the midpoint in a range of scores. In the following scores, the median is "7": 2 4 5 6 (7) 9 10 11 12. The score '7' lies at the exact halfway point in this distribution of scores. In other cases where there is an even number of scores and therefore no exact mid-point, the median must be calculated by averaging between the two centre scores: 4 5 7 8 9 11 12 13. Here, the median is 8.5 or the average of '8' and '9'. c) The mean score is the average of the total range of scores. In the previous example, the eight scores totalled 62, divided by 8, giving a mean score of 7.75.14.3.4 Descriptive Measures
Other fundamental descriptive measures are range, variance, and standard deviation. Range, the simplest dispersion expression, is the difference between the highest and the lowest scores in a particular distribution. Variance provides a mathematical index of the degree to which scores deviate from the mean score. It tends to be expressed not in terms of the original scores but as squared deviations from the mean. To compute the variance, 227

Analysing and one subtracts the mean of a distribution from each score and then squares the
Interpreting Data
result. These squared scores are then summed and divided by the number of original scores minus one. Variance is a powerful and widely applied measure. Standard Deviation is a statistical procedure that enables us to see how much the group members differ from the mean value for the group. A low standard deviation means most group members are very close to the average, while a high standard deviation score means the numbers are spread out. Unit 14 explains the procedure for arriving at a standard deviation at length.
14.4 TESTING HYPOTHESES
Much quantitative research goes beyond the simple description of data and their distributions. The search for connections or correlations to understand the underlying causes of behaviour is an important part of any data analysis. For this, the researcher may have framed specific questions or hypotheses. The data must be tested to validate or disprove the hypotheses framed at the beginning of the research. In hypothesis testing, the researcher is interested in establishing whether two or more variables are associated or whether the scores obtained in two or more groups are different - and, if so, whether such association is in a 'significant" manner. Significance means simply that the association of the variables must not happen by chance or the laws of probability alone. When a relationship is highly significant, such an association would not have happened in the normal course of things, and there is an important association between the variables. When deciding whether to accept or reject a hypothesis, the researcher must examine the statistical significance of the results. The starting point is to set up a null hypothesis, or a hypothesis which asserts that any statistical differences or relationships that emerge within the data are entirely due to chance fluctuations or random error. The research hypothesis puts up an alternative viewpoint- that the statistical relationships or differences are not due to chance but represent real phenomena that can be explained theoretically in the research. The essential characteristic of quantitative research is that it reduces phenomena to numerical codes. Numerical measurement, however, can occur at more than one level, and understanding different levels of measurement is crucial to the correct use of statistical methods of data analysis and to the proper interpretation of data. Within mass communication research, hypothesis testing is done using tests of association and significance. The term "association" is closely related to the term 'correlation'. A commonly used test of significance is the chi- square test for independence. Also called the Pearson's chi-square test or the chi- square test of association, this test is used to discover if there is a relationship between two categorical variables. Simply put, the test may show us if there is a relationship between the sex of a respondent and the amount of television s/he watches or his/her social media habits.

Tests of significance are also used in mass communication to tell us how
Data Analysis
strong a relationship between two variables is. The types of significance tests commonly used are the T-test, the F-test, and the analysis of variance (ANOVA). Essentially, these tests tell us about the significance of the difference between the mean of a small sample and the hypothetical mean of the population (expressed in terms of standard error). You don't need to know the formulae to perform these tests and arrive at some scores at this stage. You can program the software you are using, which will calculate the scores for you and give you the score, the P value, and the significance level. However, it is important for you to know how to read and interpret the scores. The first step is to determine if the association is significant. The second step is to determine which variables have the most impact. To do this, compare the p- value to the significance level on a chart available in any book on basic statistics. For a chi-square test, if the significance level is less than .05, you can conclude that an association between the variables exists. Different tests have different significance levels. You should either look up a book on basic statistics or consult a statistician to get an accurate picture. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
A. Fill in the blanks:
1. In epistemological terms, quantitative research is typically grounded in a
approach.
2. The aim of the quantitative data collection and analysis, then, is to
produce findings which lead to the or of a specified hypothesis.
3. The is the most frequently occurring in a range of scores.
4. The median score is the in a range of scores.
5. is the difference between the highest and the lowest
scores in a particular distribution.
14.5 QUALITATIVE DATA ANALYSIS
Qualitative studies are different as they draw their strength not from numbers but from answering the questions 'why' and 'how'. A quantitative study will provide vast amounts of data for analysis, while a qualitative study will enable in-depth analysis. Qualitative data comes in a variety of forms, such as field notes made while observing in the field, interview transcripts, documents, diaries, and journals. Also, during the course of the study, the researcher accumulates a large volume of data. Organising, analysing, and making sense of this data poses special challenges to the researcher.

Analysing and Unlike the quantitative approach, where data analysis does not begin until all
Interpreting Data
the numbers are collected, data analysis in qualitative research is a continuous process that begins as early as the time of data collection and continues throughout the project. Another important difference between the qualitative and quantitative methods is that while in quantitative analysis, hypotheses are developed prior to the study, in qualitative analysis, researchers use an inductive method. The data collected using this method are grouped into appropriate and meaningful categories; explanations emerge from the data. Organising the data The researcher is the main instrument in qualitative data collection and analysis and must prepare before beginning the investigation. Some social scientists describe this preparation as epoche, the process by which the researcher tries to become aware of and remove, as far as possible, prejudices, viewpoints, or assumptions that might interfere with the analysis. Epoche helps the researcher put aside personal viewpoints so that the phenomenon under study may be seen for itself. The researcher generally organises the information along a temporal dimension to facilitate working with large amounts of data generated by qualitative analysis. This means that the data are arranged in chronological order according to the sequence of events that occurred during the data collection process. Further, each piece of information is coded to identify the source, and multiple copies of notes and all other documents are gathered. Working with vast amounts of data can be very difficult and time-consuming. Today, there are several software applications that help you collate and organise the data collected. However, the process, whether done by hand or through the use of software, remains more or less the same, and it needs to be understood. Let us take this process further step by step. Identify the main themes: Carefully go through all the descriptive responses given by respondents to each question and understand the meaning they communicate. Once these are understood, broad categories or themes can be developed to classify data and analyse responses. The researcher develops the broad themes that reflect these meanings from these responses. These themes become the basis for analysing the text of unstructured interviews. Assign some codes to the main themes: If the researcher wants to count the number of times a theme has occurred in an interview, s/he needs to select a few responses to an open-ended question and identify the main themes. S/he continues to identify these themes from the same question till a saturation point is reached. Write these themes and assign a code to each of them using numbers or keywords. Classify responses under the main themes: Go through them and fit them into the identified main themes.

Integrate themes and responses into the findings: Link the qualitative
Data Analysis
responses with quantitative measures - either validating the number or developing an understanding of why people responded in a particular way. While discussing the main themes that emerged from their study, some researchers use quotations to keep the feel of the response. Such quotations, especially from case studies, add depth to the understanding of the problem. The themes must connect to the objectives and research questions in the report. It is important to note that, in qualitative research, hypotheses are not tested. It entirely depends on the way the qualitative data are analysed and reported. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
A. Fill in the blanks:
Table: 1. The three aspects of qualitative empirical research are, ,, and

2. In quantitative analysis, hypotheses are developed to the
study. Table: 3. In qualitative research, data analysis is a, process.
4. is the process by which the researcher tries to remove or
at least become aware of prejudices.
5. To facilitate working with large amounts of data, the researcher generally
first organises the information along a dimension.
14.6 DRAWING CONCLUSION THROUGH DATA
ANALYSIS
Qualitative data can be analysed using different techniques. The two popular techniques are constant comparative and analytical induction.
14.6.1 Constant Comparative Technique
This process involves the following four steps: * Comparatively assigning incidents to categories * Elaborating and refining categories * Searching for relationships and themes among categories * Simplifying and integrating data into a coherent theoretical structure. After the data have been analysed, the researcher places each unit of analysis into a set of provisional categories. As each new unit is examined, it is compared to the other units previously assigned to that category to see whether its placement is appropriate. If some units of analysis do not fit into any pre- existing category, new classifications may be created. Units that fit into more than one category should be noted and placed into a new category 231

Analysing and by finding similarities among units that fit into a category.
Interpreting Data
The researcher may write rules or propositions that attempt to describe the underlying meaning that defines a category. These rules or propositions may also be revised throughout the study. This helps the researcher focus and crystallise the study and explore the theoretical dimensions of the emerging category system. In the next stage, the researcher may examine the propositional statements and find meaningful connections. Finally, the researcher writes or summarises the research findings and integrates them into a coherent explanation of the phenomenon of the study's objectives.
14.6.2 Analytical Induction Strategy
This method blends hypothesis construction and data analysis. This strategy defines the research topic, and the hypotheses are developed. The hypotheses may be refined or reformulated until they can be adequately tested. The researcher uses the analytical induction approach to explain a phenomenon. Let us try to understand this with the help of an example. Suppose a researcher is interested in explaining why people watch home-shopping channels. The answer to this may be obvious: people do so to buy products. The researcher may not be satisfied but decides to use this as an initial hypothesis. S/he further looks out for a heavy viewer of these channels. During the interview, the respondent may say that the primary reason for watching the channels is to find new and unique products. With this input, the researcher can reformulate the hypothesis. Another viewer may answer this differently by emphasising that s/he uses the prices advertised on the channel to compare before shopping. The hypothesis is further redefined. As the researcher progresses, s/he finds cases that do not add to the existing reasons and hence cannot fit into the revised hypothesis. This method can be exhausting, making it difficult for the researcher to determine the exact stopping point. Then what should be done? This is a tricky question for which there is no simple answer. One way, especially when researching an event such as a riot, is to limit one's findings to the main objectives of the research and to clearly state that this is being done. Another way is to define the limitations or scope of the research early in the designing phase so that it is easy to see what can be included and what cannot. Finally, if there is a time limit on the study (especially if funded by a donor) or as a time to submit the thesis draft, the time limit will indicate when to stop; remember that all research is finite in time - it does not go on endlessly, and the researcher must determine when it is best to stop.
14.6.3 Generalising about Generalisation
The literature and the theory of science recognise two different conceptions of 'generalisation'. Empirical or statistical generalisation refers to the capacity of quantitative methodologies to apply predefined (hypothetically deduced) categories to a representative set of empirical instances, thus supporting 232 external validity. Theoretical or analytical generalisation refers to articulating

new concepts or categories, typically in qualitative inquiry, that conceive
Data Analysis
empirical instances in a more consistent and insightful manner, prioritising internal validity. Both these aspects are relevant for assessing findings and insights of qualitative and quantitative studies.
14.6.4 Converging Practices and Approaches
In recent decades, several research scholars have outlined ways to combine and mix quantitative and qualitative methodologies. Three principal forms have emerged as possible methods of combining qualitative and quantitative methodologies. These are facilitation, triangulation, and complementarity. Facilitation: Traditionally, The most common practice has been treating qualitative and quantitative approaches as relatively separate steps in research. Facilitation aims to facilitate in-depth analyses of respondents by formulating interpretive categories. For example, in survey research, analytical strategies are arrived at that are conceptually precise and meaningful to the respondents. The mapping of respondents' social lives may be facilitated by subsequently drawing up interpretative categories after analysing the members in-depth. Triangulation is a strategy for gaining several perspectives on the same phenomenon. It can be carried out through several data types, several investigators, and several methodologies. For example, experimental and observational approaches can be combined and analysed to interpret a phenomenon. Complementarity: Here, different analytical categories and procedures may be appropriate for capturing aspects of the same empirical domain or for addressing two different domains that affect the same research question. In the final stage, two categorically different sets of findings can be joined concerning a common theoretical framework. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
A. Fill in the blanks:
1. The two popular techniques of qualitative data analysis are the
and technique.
2. In the constant comparative technique, the researcher places each unit of
analysis into a set of categories.
3. The method of analytical induction blends and data analysis.
4. Three principal forms of combining qualitative and quantitative
methodologies are , and
5. is a strategy for gaining several perspectives on the same
phenomenon.

Analysing and 14.7 LET US SUM UP
Interpreting Data
In this unit, we have discussed the purpose, importance, and significance of data analysis in research. Data analysis is defined as the processing of collecting raw data and converting it into information useful for users' decision-making. The data is analysed to answer questions, test hypotheses, or disprove theories. This chapter discusses various methods that are applied in data analysis, both quantitative and qualitative. The understanding of' analyses has tended to divide qualitative and quantitative research traditions. In quantitative media studies, rule-governed procedures of segmenting and categorising the components of content form the basis of interpretation. Meanwhile, qualitative studies typically emphasise meaning as a process unfolding in contexts. Ultimately, it is not an either/or situation. Each tradition must feed into and supplement each other to yield accurate results and logical explanations for phenomena. How data are gathered and analysed may differ, but both aim to understand a situation or solve a problem in the long run. Quantitative data collection and analysis aim to produce findings that lead to the acceptance or rejection of a specified hypothesis. Numerical data analysis through statistical procedures represents a systematic and objective way of determining whether significant patterns of relationships exist among the phenomena measured in data collection. Descriptive and summary statistics and descriptive measures are used to analyse the data. Qualitative data comes in various forms, such as notes made while observing in the field, interview transcripts, documents, diaries, and journals. The constant comparative technique and analytical deduction strategy are applied to analyse and draw conclusions from the data. In recent decades, many scholars and researchers have suggested and outlined ways of mixing and combining quantitative and qualitative methodologies. These combined forms can enrich and reflect in-depth and breadth of the status of that knowledge. With this unit, you have almost reached the end of the research process. The final stage is report writing or the presentation of your research for your peers, the academic community, the funding agency, or simply for your next academic degree. The last unit of this course explains how to write your report effectively.
14.8 KEYWORDS
Data analysis is the process of collecting raw data and converting it into information useful for users' decision-making. External validity: The degree to which the results of a study are generalisable to other situations. Epoche is the process by which the researcher tries to remove or at least become aware of prejudices.
234 Hypothesis: A tentative generalisation about the relationship between two or

more variables that predict an outcome.
Data Analysis
Internal validity: The properties of a research study are such that the results are based on expected conditions rather than extraneous variables. Operationalisation: A definition that specifies behaviour patterns and procedures to experience or measure a concept. Summary statistics are statistics that summarise a great deal of numerical information about a distribution, such as mean and standard deviation. Skewness is the degree of departure of a curve from the normal distribution (curves can be positively or negatively skewed). Triangulation: It combines quantitative and qualitative approaches to solve a problem. Qualitative research method: A research method that uses flexible questioning. Quantitative research method: A research method that uses standard questioning.
14.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Arthur Asa Berger, 2011, Media and Communication Research Methods,
Sage Publications.
2. Anders Hansen & David Machin, 2013, Media and Communication
Research Methods, Palgrave Macmillan.
3. Klaus Bruhn Jensen, 2012, A Handbook of Media and Communication
Research: Qualitative and Quantitative Methodologies, Routledge,
London.
4. Roger D. Wimmer and Joseph R. Dominic, 2010, Mass Media Research,
An Introduction, Wadsworth.
14.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Data Analysis
2. Hypotheses
3. Accuracy
4. Categorising, Segmenting
5. Observations
Check Your Progress: 2
1. Hypothetico-deductive
2. Acceptance, rejection
3. Mode
4. Mid-point

Analysing and 5. Range
Interpreting Data
Check Your Progress: 3
1. Strategy, Tactics, Techniques
2. Prior
3. Continuous
4. Epoche
5. Temporal
Check Your Progress: 4
1. Constant comparative, the analytical induction
2. Provisional
3. Hypothesis construction
4. Facilitation, triangulation, and complementarity
5. Triangulation

ANNEXURE Data Analysis
CODING SHEET

A nalysing and
UNIT 15 DIGITAL DATA HARVESTING
Interpreting Data
AND ANALYSIS
Structure
15.0 Introduction
15.1 Learning Outcome
15.2 Digital Data Harvesting Techniques
15.3 Digital Data Analysis Techniques
15.4 Let Us Sum Up
15.5 Further Readings
15.6 Check Your Progress: Possible Answer
15.0 INTRODUCTION
In this Unit, you will learn about data retrieval (or extraction) and data harvesting techniques in Digital Media Research Methods (henceforth DMRMs). Understanding digital data retrieval techniques from the mess of information empowers a researcher to stay focused and objective. The information delivered through digital media platforms needs different information treatments. The techniques mentioned below would allow a researcher to collect results that are mostly below two thousand on Google and sometimes as low as sixty. However, the idea is not to have fewer results but to have the results according to a researcher's needs and research objectives. First, you will learn the concept of data reduction, i.e. minimising the information overload and effortlessly sifting through the information maze on the Internet, thus arriving at your required information in Google. Secondly, you would become familiar with various websites and news sources' data extraction and harvesting tools. The chapter poses new challenges when designing your Google power search (henceforth GPS) commands to better tell Google or the search engine about your query. The availability of a few open-source resources and browser extensions would develop your sense of information discrimination. The development of the "art of navigation" in the information overload may be the biggest takeaway of this chapter.
15.1 LEARNING OUTCOME
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the different techniques of data harvesting * Undertake a data collection exercise to extract information from the cyberspace * Understand the different techniques of data analysis

15.2 DIGITAL DATA HARVESTING
Harvesting and
TECHNIQUES
Analysis Data is regarded as a fundamental unit and scientifically recorded factual piece of information which can be appropriated for further analysis. This way, the digital content available on online newspapers, websites, social media platforms, discussion forums, government documents, reports, etc., constitutes big data that can be harvested using relevant tools. According to Luo & McKinney, "research methods are defined as specific methods and techniques employed to collect and analyse data in a research study". Hence, any software, retrieval or analysing tools, data formats, techniques or commands, freeware, open databases, data format converters, websites, apps, scripts, browser extensions, etc., form the ecosystem of the DMRMs. In this part, you would acquaint yourself with the various data retrieval and harvesting techniques.
15.2.1 Digital Data Retrieval & Harvesting Techniques
Amenable to Research
Data retrieval is defined as obtaining data from websites using commands and techniques. In contrast, data harvesting is defined as "scraping or downloading" data on our desktops for actual analysis. Many software and tools are available that scrape data as per your keywords from the entire web or the websites you desire, but most of them are paid, and the free ones may not serve your purpose fully. This section enumerates good free online resources. Once you have correctly identified the research problem and the objectives, you may proceed with the data retrieval or scrapping. Conventional methods like questionnaires, hard copies of newspapers or records offer little respite to a researcher in this information age. The ease of data retrieval through online questionnaires, news websites and freely available databases is astonishing. Web data retrieval techniques such as Google Power Searching, which apply across the web content, have reduced the data collection time to just a few minutes and the results to only a few hundred. Like the power searching commands, many news websites have the option of "advanced search", wherein they provide a customised search for the news as per the time frame, keyword, word combination with keywords, an exact search of words in a sequence, deletion of non-desired words, the addition of desired words, news sources, region etc. thus giving you complete control over the content. In other words, these filters bypass the SEO (search engine optimisation) techniques and present data as per your query. A few useful Google power search (henceforth GPS) commands are mentioned here. Basic search-First, entering a few words in Google, like Word technology, power empowerment, and Internet police court judge, would bring the results (documents) from around the world, with these words anywhere in the text, as shown in the image.

Interpreting Data
Exact search--The search "media censorship in India" (in double quotes) would bring results that have the exact sequence of words of the query. Without double quotes, every word is searched differently, and the results increase unnecessarily. The image shows only 27 focused results, and a portion of the line "media censorship in India" is highlighted in bold, along with some context of words before and after. This would be the standard interpretation of the results for the other queries also as mentioned below. The double quotes put on the single word like "empower" would bring the results (documents) which have the "empower" word in pure form and not as "empowering" or "empowering", etc. Hence, it is advisable not to double quote a single word to get results with all the word derivatives. site:www.hindustantimes.com technology AND rural AND scheme--This command, once typed in Google, would bring the news items within the
240 Hindustan Times website, with the words "technology", "rural", and

"scheme" anywhere in the running text of news items. The selected words,
Harvesting and
such as "rural" and "technology," are highlighted in the result. Analysis The "AND" is not a word but a Boolean operator, which must be in capital letters; otherwise, Google would count it as a word if it were used in a small letter. The continuity in the letters of the site command must be taken care of, and one space should be entered before and after the AND command, as shown in the image. Filetype: pdf technology AND media AND Internet AND rural AND skill OR talent--This command would bring only pdf documents with the words "technology" and "media" and "Internet" and "skill" or the word "talent". The file type can be changed to include more, like docx, ppt, txt, xls, etc., as per your choice of data. It should be noted that when we use the AND command, the results decrease as we limit the choices. When we use the OR command, the results increase because we give the choices. Also, as shown in the figure, when the search query tends to become academic, Google offers scholarly research articles on the query with good citations. site:www.hindustantimes.com women AND technology--money--rural-- This would show news from the Hindustan Times' website with "women" and "technology" words only, thereby removing the news that had "money" and "rural" words in the text. Here, the minus sign must be just before the next word and have a space after the previous word. It can also be used in multiples if you want to retrieve documents that don't have "money" and "rural" words. Another search with "nano"--car would not bring the results of nano car but the nanoparticles, etc. site:www.tribuneindia.com in title crime AND women - The news would be from The Tribune newspaper, which only has "crime" and "woman" words in the news title. Hence, we have only 259 results which are highly focused.

Interpreting Data
site:www.tribuneindia.com in title crime intext: cyber OR Internet - In this, news from The Tribune would appear that has the word "crime" in their title and either "cyber" or "Internet" words in the running text of the news. Hence, a researcher can collect data from any publication's website and enter the desired query in the title and the text with the commands and can get the desired output. These 56 results, as shown in the figure, can manually (though not recommended) be opened, and saved as HTML files on the computer and printed for the study. inurl: MOOC AND course--This command brings all hyperlinks (URLs) in which the words "MOOC" and "course" appear, as shown in the first result in the picture. site:.gov women AND empowerment--By entering this in Google, you will retrieve documents with the words "women" and "empowerment" within the .gov domain. Likewise, the search can be expanded to include .in, .edu, .au, .pk, and .sl (country-specific domain names).

Harvesting and
Analysis Here, it would be pertinent to know that by combining individual commands, e.g. site:.gov women AND empowerment OR skills -crime -police filetype: pdf, we can get much better and enriched results in Google. Time filter - the data can be retrieved between a few dates, as shown in the figure. This command would be activated by clicking the "Tool" button, as shown in the figure. Filetype: ppt women AROUND (5) technology - The search results in the form of PowerPoint presentations would appear in which the word "technology" appears within the proximity of 5 words left and five words right of the word "women". More commands, like OR, minus, and intext title, can be included here. Related:www.census.gov--By applying this command, the other similar sites relating to the one entered (www.census.gov) will appear. This can be useful for finding similar stuff like databases, research publications, etc. It broadens the researcher's perspective.

Interpreting Data
All the above commands must be entered in Google, and the results are obtained. The command characters are currently limited to 2000. These GPS commands written here are simple and not complex, whereas the research data needs a complex command design (for effective data retrieval), as per our research objectives. The individual commands described above can be freely used in combinations. Hence, a typical complex search command may look as - filetype:pdf inurl:"corpus linguistics" intext: computer AND Internet AND statistics OR valid. The still more complex query can be designed as - site:initial: technology- intext: crime AND women -inurl: cyber AND -bbc AND - journal AND - Internet AND -police AND -court AND -blog AND -science AND - news AND -student. Country-Specific Search -By selecting the country from the tools (as shown), we can get the search results specific to that country. The picture shows the results from India.

Harvesting and
Analysis If we search The Hindu's website for simple words like site:thehindu.com ombudsman Internet false journalism, we will get the results (news) with these words. Searching the results in Hindi or another Non-English language - If we use the command - mihlaa AND auoihk AND ittN rnett AND kaushl filetype: pdf then all results in Hindi would appear in pdf document format. The Google search needs non-English words (Hindi, Punjabi, etc.) in Unicode. If we go to www.translate.google.com, we can get the output in Unicode for the desired words. A few things may be taken care of while using GPS -
1. The commands can be combined irrespective of the sequence and length.
However, the increased complexity may lose sight of the research objective.

Analysing and 2. You cannot self-design the commands as these are Boolean operators,
Interpreting Data
and the Google servers recognise them as such (e.g. AND, not "and").
3. Spaces and continuity in the commands should be meticulously
maintained, as the results may change drastically if the command is not entered properly.
4. Search can be done in regional languages, too.
5. One Google search releases 7 grams of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere; hence, it is advisable to use Google search with discretion.
6. The same set of commands would work on all Google products like
www.scholar.google.com, YouTube, Google News (www.news.google.com) and Google Books (www.books.google.com
7. Double quotes and AND & OR commands are universal commands like
Ctrl V and Ctrl C. They work well in other search engines, too.
8. Increased complexity in commands beyond a limit is likely to produce
wrong results, as we may not be able to comprehend the full design of the command.
9. Testing a few results after running the command is advisable to ensure
the correct results.
10. If unsure, go to the "advanced search" in the "settings" and search from
there, but it doesn't support all power commands.
11. Google, by default, searches for "All" (shown in the image). However,
the search can be expanded to include images, videos, maps, books etc.
12. Google search with images is quite useful.
13. www.books.google.com would fetch highly beneficial results from
millions of books available. The command written underneath produces only seven results, and when opened, the keywords are highlighted in the text to give a contextual snapshot for better understanding.
14. www.news.google.com is a very good resource for all online news (from
all websites and sources). As shown in the figure, the site has an inbuilt search window for easy data retrieval.

Harvesting and
Analysis Let's assume that the relevant content from the web has been obtained through Google search and needs to be harvested in the proper format. If the results are a few (in hundreds), then a manual approach of opening each result in a separate window can be tried, and data can be copied in separate text or word format. In case of a large number of results, researchers can always invoke the 5% error margin rule and arrive at the sample size of results out of the total population of results by entering the population size in the website www.raosoft.com/samplesize.html and the sample obtained. There are a few chrome extensions (e.g. linkclump) which, after applying the GPS command, can collect the headlines of the links and their URLs. The Headlines can be researched for content analysis. The output is shown in the image. The individual URLs can be opened in www.textise.net to save the data and text file format, or they can be fed into Python (programming language beyond the scope of this chapter) and the text collected. Linkclump can be downloaded from the Google Play Store.

Analysing and Application-Headlines can be collected and analysed using the corpus
Interpreting Data
software. . If you want to make a collection of PowerPoint files, use the "filetype: ppt" command (also pdf, doc, ppt, etc.) and run it in a freeware system called "outwit doc". All documents are downloaded effortlessly, which makes good content for researchers. This data can be easily read by the Free Desktop Search software (e.g., Copernic Desktop Search) in a similar way to Google commands. This immediately makes the context clear to the researcher. Similarly, "outwit hub" freeware allows data extraction from RSS feeds and exporting them to Excel for research. It can also extract data from the webpage, harvest the tables inside, etc. It also generates the headline, a brief abstract of the news, and the news URLs. Along similar lines, images from www.images.google.com or www.flickr.com can be harvested by opening the image search URL in the "outwit image hub". The RSS feeds are the easiest way to retrieve data from news websites. One need not chase the content; the reverse is true. The new sites have RSS feeds in XML format in the form of hyperlinks, which are read by the feed readers like Feedly. They are stored and refreshed at desired regular intervals to acquaint with the latest news on that feed's topic. However, harvesting data from the feeds is still an issue. We must apply manual methods for small research studies and proprietary software for the bigger ones. Opening RSS feeds in MS- Excel is easy and effective data collection. By activating the

"developer" tab in the ribbon, clicking "source", pressing "XML maps'',
Harvesting and
pressing "add," and entering the feed URL in the "file name" field and Analysis opening the feed by going to the "data" tab in the ribbon and pressing "refresh all" button would refresh the data from RSS feeds whenever the news site updates it. Metasearch engines -These engines search multiple search engines in one go and remove duplicate results while collating the result. www.searx.com is a very good free meta-search engine. which can search the web and segregate information into images, music files, news, science stuff, social media, and videos. It has a built-in time filter, too. The results are downloadable in CSV file, RSS, and Jason formats. It has some built-in statistical functions, too, which calculate the relevance of the news stories. However, its use beyond its limit restricts your search and data download. Regarding audio-visual media, every minute, 400 hrs of videos are uploaded on YouTube, adding to the already billions, but by applying the filters just under the address bar (HD, duration, time, type of video, view count, etc.) while searching, the results are reduced to a few hundred. This gives representative data to the researcher, which can be downloaded using "YouTube downloaders" for audio-visual analysis. https://ytdt.digitalmethods.net/ can harvest the video details and convert them into Excel format by selecting the desired variables, such as title, video description, comment text, date, likes, replies, duration, view count, top-rated comments, etc.

Interpreting Data
Apart from collecting comments and usual video parameters, the freeware downloads the pdf file, which maps user interactions in the comments section. This makes it a nice tool for video social network analysis. The comments thus collected can be harvested by using the "data" tab on the ribbon and pressing the "from web" button. A text box would prompt where you can put the webpage URL with the comments. After pressing go, the webpage would be imported into Excel in an editable format, which is amenable to data analysis. These data attributes can be stored in Excel or SPSS to analyse the categorical data. Google SpreadSheets, too, is a very important tool for scraping web data from websites and social media. However, it is a slightly technical process, and there are very useful videos available on YouTube to help you understand how Google SpreadSheets work for harvesting website data. It should be kept in mind that all major data harvesting tools are largely paid for with proper planning; freeware, too, can serve the purpose. Additionally, there are very good readymade collections of data on every topic collected and hosted by researchers for non-commercial and research purposes. GPS commands can be accessed and downloaded quickly. Data harvesting from social media like WhatsApp, Facebook, and Twitter, a separate Unit is devoted to this topic, where the concepts of API (Application Programming Interface), access token, secret, consumer key, etc., have been discussed at length. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Create a keyword string for a research topic of your choice and use the
appropriate online tool to extract the relevant data. Share your experience.

Harvesting and
Analysis

2. Lists the pros and cons of using digital resources for academic purposes.

15.3 DIGITAL DATA ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES
In this Unit, you will learn how to apply data analysis skills to the text/data under the Digital Media Research Methods (henceforth DMRMs). This understanding of data behaviour would acquaint you with the various technological intricacies of analysis. The information harvested through digital media platforms needs different analytical skills. For many researchers, the DMRMs is a completely technological process with very little manual data handling and analysis. For others, it may be a healthy combination of hassle-free online data collection and subsequent analysis in a conventional research protocol. Both approaches have pros and cons depending upon the nature and duration of the research enquiry. However, with technological advancement, the argument tends to favour maximum research automation, especially for content analysis studies. You will learn a few new kinds of digital data analysis while simultaneously applying the DMRMs. These software-assisted analytical skills are new to the social sciences and media research. This chapter will help you make sense of the data by applying state-of-the-art data analytical techniques like corpus and sentiment analysis. For systematic and easy learning, this DMRMs section has been divided into three sub-parts, which cover the whole gamut of the topics, from the nature of the data to interpretational nuances that run deep into the data. In the last section, you learn the powerful commands to search Google for your query with utmost precision and focus, thus weeding out unwanted and irrelevant results. The results are high in quality and very low in quantity. Thus, the data is easily manageable even with the manual method of downloading (copy and paste). Various tools and Apps were discussed to harvest this data in the format you need and, if not, convert it with a converter. Along with the text harvesting, you learn to download PowerPoint presentations (PPTs), doc files, PDF files, and images with a single click using freeware. RSS feeds were discussed as the push method rather than the pull method, along with a constant and less time-consuming method of refreshing the data stream. This chapter discusses the analysis of the data collected.

Analysing and Methods to Analyse the Digital Data
Interpreting Data
It is assumed that the data harvested conforms to the format and parameters of the research objectives. It would be an injustice to discount the relevance of traditional research methods even on the electronically collected data. The DMRMs can supplement, not replace, the traditional methods. Here, two scenarios emerge. First, technology takes care of the data collection, and the researchers conduct further analysis and interpretation per established traditional norms and conventions. e. taking printouts of the collected news, entering them in the code sheet manually, and finally analysing them using statistical analysis software. Second, the more technologically advanced option, the huge data collection (in text form), is subjected to "computational analysis" like corpus linguistics and textual analysis. The rationale is that this data, being huge, cannot be processed and analysed by the human mind. Both are perfect as per the scope of enquiry. The data collected is of two types - Quantitative (numerical) and Qualitative (text). Quantitative Data Analysis-This data can be of nominal type, i.e. naming the variable (Gender - 1. Male 2. Female), ordinal i.e. in order (Happiness level after Meditation - 1. Very Bad 2. Bad 3. Good. 4. Very good 5. Excellent) and interval (Age - 10-15, 15-20, 20-25, 25-30). It simply means that the output can be quantified in numbers. Usually, data feeding in Excel or SPSS for analysis must follow a certain method, which is sometimes a challenge for researchers. However, the harvested datasets from open databases are mostly good, and descriptive statistics (frequency, mean, median, mode, standard deviation, etc.) can be generated in MS Excel. For this, open Excel, click the file, go to options, click add-ins, then Excel add- ins, add 'analysis toolpak" and click OK. In the Data tab of the menu, a new option 'data analysis' would appear on the right side. Now feed the numerical data in column click the "data analysis". A box would appear and select the "descriptive statistics" option. Now, define the input range by selecting the data and the output range. Click on the summary statistics, and OK. You will get the descriptive stat in the new column, as shown in column 1 of the image.

However, Excel's central tendency tests (mean, median, mode) can be
Harvesting and
generated only for the numeric (parametric) data. SPSS is required to analyse Analysis the categorical or nominal data (Non-parametric). For easier parametric data analysis, www.socscistatistics.com/tests/ can be accessed, and data can be fed, and output taken easily. The present section will focus on qualitative data (collection of huge text) and its analysis through a corpus linguistics approach. A corpus is a "body of texts, utterances, or other specimens considered more or less representative of a language, and usually rendered in a machine-readable format" (Peng, H., Cambria, E., & Hussain, A. 2017). Earlier, we were taught to apply data analysis techniques only on nominal and numerical data, whereas the text obtained through open-ended questions was expected to be explained in a qualitative manner of essay writing. The DMRMs challenge this notion, and statistics apply to the text too. The corpus approach to the social sciences (CASS) is an innovative DMRM approach based on the corpus method. Huge data files in .txt format can be opened using a few free corpus analysis software (e.g. AntConc). The HTML PPT or Doc format data can be converted into .txt format and saved as UTF-8 encoding in Notepad for corpus analysis. Before applying textual statistical analysis, it is very important to know the "nature of the data '' in conventional research; likewise, in DMRMs, the basic characteristics of the text need to be obtained. Text analysis tools online (www.textalyzer.net) can analyse basic traits of the text, i.e. total word count (tokens), unique words (types), lexical density (textual diversity), sentence count, average sentence length and readability factor (easy, medium or hard). It can analyse text on a website and upload documents and the text on its website, as shown in the image.

Analysing and The Gunning Fog Index (also at www.gunning-fog-index.com) analyses the
Interpreting Data
text's readability as 6-easy and 20-hard. Lexical density or complexity factor analyses the text's "richness' ' (i.e., more repeated words, less richness). The world's frequency can also be counted. A free software, AntConc (www.laurenceanthony.net/software/antconc/), can be downloaded for more advanced corpus analysis. Word List - The most basic corpus analysis of text involves the generation of "word lists", i.e., the total number of words (tokens) present in the text and the number of unique words (types). The type-to-token ratio gives a score of lexical density (i.e. richness of the language in text), e.g. if a text has a total of 120456 words and 15675 unique words, then the type-to-token ratio is
0.13 (13%).
A low score indicates non-informative text and vice versa. A token-to-type ratio indicates the "vocabulary density score", which in our case is 8th. This also indicates the diversity in the text by indicating that "at every 8th word in the text, a new word appears". However, the interpretation of textual scores can be highly subjective at times. The words can be clicked to see the context in which they are used in the text. Collocations - The text can be further analysed deeply by using collocations. Sinclair (1991) defines collocation as the tendency for words to occur together and be identifiable by frequency of occurrence, e.g. "media habits", "triple talaq", and "social media". The software calculates the collocates of the "node word" (i.e. central word as defined by you; here, the node word is "media"). The figures show that the tendency of co-occurrence of the word "social" with "media" is statistically significant, with a mutual information ratio score of 9.7, which is high. Any score above 3 is significant. The negative score indicates that the two words shun each other. Collocation is calculated for the node word within a span of 5 words to the left and five to the right.

This word association forms the meaning in the readers' mind, and the nature
Harvesting and
of one word affects the other. A random view of your association of words at Analysis a mental level may tell you the significance of the "meanings" that you attribute to the objects in this world. Concordances - Qualitative studies tend to gain a lot because of DMRMs. The latter has made various new approaches to text reading possible. The concordance approach allows the meaning derivation from contexts. Concordance is the display of a given word "together with a given amount of preceding and following context". It is, thus, contextualising the text. The word list function is not very useful unless the context is known. Even negative words can often be used positively, and vice versa, e.g., Let us save the world from the crisis. Peace talks derailed. As explained in the chapter, a detailed sentiment analysis can be conducted for these statements. The image shows the context of two collocates (social and media) in the corpus text. By describing the text, we can find the context in which they have been used. Hence, a whole range of discussion around two compatible words can be found and explained. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Enumerate the benefits of digital data analysis techniques.

Analysing and 2. Explain the utilisation of digital data analysis techniques.
Interpreting Data

Word Clusters - DMRMs, through the corpus approach, also enable the generation of word clusters of one or more words. The clusters present in the text stress the "word sense" of the text. Word clusters are different from collocates as clusters are fixed words appearing together, whereas collocates may or may not be fixed (span of 5 words on either side), and their probability is statistically calculated. The word cluster "media and", which has a frequency of 10, as shown in the image, can be clicked, and the context in which it appears can be read (concordance). A researcher must enter a word in the software to find the clusters. N-grams-It is like word clusters, with the only difference being that N-grams are software-identifiable groups of words, and we cannot specify our own words to find N-grams.

Harvesting and
Analysis As explained above, this context can be subjected to different analysis conventions, such as concordance. Keywords - Another important milestone is the method of keyword comparison between two sets of texts. DMRMs in this function allows us to statistically compare the unusually high frequency of certain words in one text and vice versa. The image shows the comparison of two corpora. The text on political news was compared to texts on crime news. It shows that words like Modi, India, BJP, minister, Bihar, Pakistan, Kashmir, and meeting (all relevant words) are statistically (see the keyness value) more frequent in the political corpus than the crime corpus. When the crime corpus is compared to the political corpus, words like murder, Indrani, Sheena, accused, case, etc., were statistically more frequent in the crime corpus than in the political corpus. In a recent corpus study of US Presidential elections speeches of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, it was found that Trump's keywords include going, very, Hillary, I, they, are, it, I'm, don't, great, China, really, billion, nobody, Mexico, immigration, disaster, Islamic, nice, mean, folks, me, somebody, people, OK, tremendous, problem, thought, totally, radical, anybody, got, amazing, border, rigged, foreign, money, worst, literally whereas Hillary's keywords include women, families, economy, together, work, American (and America), future, rights, create, men, growth, equal, fair, deserve, global, challenges, threats, opportunity, Israeli, help, stronger, 257

Analysing and students, income, invest, raising, everyone, God, children, abortion,
Interpreting Data
responsibility, and vigorous. (Kristin, 2016) In addition to the above functions, a corpus can be analysed using the "stop word list" widely available on the Internet. This list filters out unimportant words like am, is, are, me, you, has, have, this, that, etc. Hence, the core words present a more coherent analysis. Corpus can be searched using the specific words provided by the researchers in a vast amount of text. The word list function would throw only the results having those words, and this way, the research process can stay focused. Since dealing with the text is a fun exercise, a few researchers have done corpus analysis by analysing the text for good and bad words or, in other words, positive and negative words. A corpus study of tweets on Jat reservation agitation in Haryana revealed that negative words outnumber positive words by a huge margin. However, the corpus approach has a few limitations. "The improper and skewed representation of the target language fails to serve properly or fails to meet the general requirements of the language investigators" (Landau 2001:
321) . Language is an internal construct and hence cannot be regarded as the
sole evidence in determining something. Word Cloud--A graphic representation of the text's prominent words (in number) can be generated at www.tagcrowd.com and www.wordle.com by copying and pasting the text into the box. Sentiment Analysis - "Sentiment analysis (sometimes known as opinion mining or emotion Artificial Intelligence) refers to the use of natural language processing, text analysis, computational linguistics, and biometrics to systematically identify, extract, quantify, and study affective states and subjective information" (Wikipedia). "sentiment analysis aims to determine the attitude of a speaker, writer, or other subject concerning some topic or the overall contextual polarity or emotional reaction to a document, interaction, or event" (ibid). It is done on a text (corpus) or individual statements collection. The exponential rise of social media (Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp etc.) and growing access to users' feedback (YouTube comments on videos, blogs, and readers' comments on the news of online newspapers) have given rise to sentiment analysis. The criterion to which the text is subjected is polarity (positive, neutral, negative), subjectivity (people's opinions, views, discussions etc.) and objectivity (facts and figures, unbiased information). The degree and strength of polarity to matter as a sentence or 258 paragraph may be mildly positive or negative. This is a relatively new branch

of DMRMs and is gaining popularity in social sciences. The most convenient
Harvesting and
way of analysing the statements (e.g. headlines, leaders' quotes, the gist of Analysis parliament speeches) is to use Google spreadsheets and install an extension known as "Text Analysis" by clicking add-ons. The statements to be analysed for sentiment are pasted in the spreadsheet as individual sentences, selected, and analysed by the App.
Statement Tonality Score Polarity Score
Six months of demonetisation: How Modi objective 0.99 negative 0.83 failed to keep the promises ... Demonetisation and the Delusion of GDP objective 0.52 neutral 0.61 Growth | demonetisation: Every department should subjective 1.00 neutral 0.51 disclose demonetisation... Buy Demonetisation and Black Money objective 0.54 neutral 0.67 Book Online at Low Prices in ... Demonetisation - Latest News, Analysis, subjective 1.00 neutral 0.85 Opinion - Demonetisation: Why no window to deposit objective 0.91 negative 0.70 banned notes after ... Has demonetisation boosted income tax subjective 1.00 neutral 0.82 collections? - Demonetisation News - Demonetisation subjective 0.86 neutral 0.80 Latest news on www.oneindia ... India Has Added 91 Lakh Taxpayers Since subjective 0.98 neutral 0.69
Demonetisation: Arun Jaitley
Decipher the Demonetisation subjective 0.84 neutral 0.50 Demonetisation: After SC criticism, the objective 0.87 neutral 0.85 Centre will decide on the deadline. demonetisation: Latest News, Articles on objective 0.51 neutral 0.83 demonetisation | Business ... Demonetisation effect: The government objective 1.00 neutral 0.75 collects Rs 6000 crore in tax on unexplained Demonetisation to usher in tax terrorism? - subjective 0.87 neutral 0.83 Demonetisation: Critics Silenced as India objective 0.76 neutral 0.61 moves ahead - Narendra Modi Macroeconomic Impact of Demonetisation- objective 1.00 neutral 0.55 A Preliminary Assessment ... Infrastructure Today Magazine | Impact of objective 1.00 neutral 0.76 demonetisation on ... The Reserve Bank on Demonetisation objective 0.98 neutral 0.62 Demonetisation: reality and the optics | subjective 1.00 neutral 0.42

Demonetisation will hurt the BJP very subjective 0.99 negative 0.48
Interpreting Data
badly: Rahul Gandhi - Inc. in Social impact of demonetisation may have objective 0.70 neutral 0.54 been greater: World Bank ... Luxury realty market takes hit post subjective 0.56 neutral 0.72 demonetisation - The Table presents a few harvested headlines on "demonetisation" from Indian newspapers by applying the Google command - demonetisation site: in. You can analyse if the sentiment analysis done by the software makes sense. The score indicates confidence in determining the suitability of the value assigned to that statement. A score of 1 indicates 100 per cent confidence. Sentiment analysis of a complete paragraph can be done by www.danielsoper.com/sentimentanalysis and its interpretation is very simple. As it is impossible to scan the deluge of the public's reactions on social media and elsewhere, Natural Language Processing (NLP) must be applied, and overall tonality can be measured. Sentiments change over time, and numerous resources on the web conduct real-time analyses of the sentiment of a particular brand, person, topic, etc. Some websites, like www.sentiment140.com and www.csc2.ncsu.edu/faculty/ healey/ tweet_viz/tweet_app/, are very good sentiment analysis on Twitter. https://www.lexalytics.com/semantria/excel is also a powerful tool for analysing sentiment, assigning categories, using word clouds, etc., to the text. It's free for first analysing the first ten thousand statements. The sentiment of a single word (person, brand, issue, etc.) can be nicely analysed by http://www.opinioncrawl.com/ It must be noted that text analytics is a relatively new area in the computational aspect. Hence, the tools may or may not perform as per your

expectation of accuracy, but by and large, they give you a fair idea of the
Harvesting and
"behaviour" of the text. Analysis
15.4 LET US SUM UP
You have learnt the broad concept of Digital Media Research Methods, emphasising analysing the data threadbare for qualitative and quantitative attributes. Only DMRMs can make this dual treatment possible for the data, whereas other conventional techniques apply to either. The lesson empowers you to appreciate this innovation and challenge the strongly held opinions about the nature of data analysis. The researchers trained in qualitative research can expect their "thorough and thoughtful control" over the data.
15.5 FURTHER READINGS
1. Luan, H., Geczy, P., Lai, H., Gobert, J., Yang, S. J., Ogata, H., ... & Tsai,
C. C. (2020). Challenges and future directions of big data and artificial
intelligence in education. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 580820.2. Levy, R. E. (2021). Social media, news consumption, and polarisation:
Evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Review, 111(3), 831-870.3. Naeem, M., Jamal, T., Diaz-Martinez, J., Butt, S. A., Montesano, N.,
Tariq, M. I., ... & De-La-Hoz-Valdiris, E. (2022). Trends and future perspective challenges in big data. In Advances in Intelligent Data
Analysis and Applications: Proceeding of the Sixth Euro-China
Conference on Intelligent Data Analysis and Applications, 15-18
October 2019, Arad, Romania (pp. 309-325). Springer Singapore.
4. Mahrt, M., & Scharkow, M. (2013). The value of big data in digital
media research. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 57(1), 20- 33.5. Penzel, T., Hirshkowitz, M., Harsh, J., Chervin, R. D., Butkov 5, N.,
Kryger, M., ... & Chesson, A. L. (2007). Digital analysis and technical specifications. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 3(02), 109-120.6. Twenge, J. M., & Martin, G. N. (2020). Gender differences in
associations between digital media use and psychological well-being: Evidence from three large datasets. Journal of Adolescence, 79, 91-102.15.6 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWER
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Selecting the right keywords is pivotal for effective research. For instance,
for a study on "Digital Inequalities in Online Education," relevant keywords could include "digital divide," "online learning," "accessibility," and "educational disparities." Using tools like Google Scholar or databases specific to the field can yield valuable data. Google Scholar used to extract scholarly articles, ensuring credibility and depth in the research. The process involved refining search terms iteratively to capture diverse perspectives and

Analysing and current findings, enriching the investigation.
Interpreting Data
2. Pros and cons of employing digital resources in academia require careful
consideration. On the positive side, digital resources offer unparalleled access to vast information, facilitate collaborative learning through online platforms, and promote flexibility in study schedules. However, challenges such as information overload, credibility issues with online sources, and distractions like social media can impede academic focus. Additionally, reliance on digital tools may exacerbate digital inequalities, disadvantaging students with limited access to technology or reliable internet connections. Balancing these factors is crucial for maximising the benefits of digital resources while mitigating their drawbacks in academic pursuits. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Digital data analysis techniques offer a multitude of advantages. Firstly,
they facilitate enhanced decision-making through data-driven insights, enabling organizations to make informed choices based on empirical evidence rather than intuition alone. Secondly, these techniques allow for the identification of trends and patterns within datasets, empowering businesses, and institutions to develop strategies that capitalize on emerging opportunities or mitigate potential risks. Additionally, digital data analysis enhances operational efficiency by streamlining processes and identifying areas for improvement, leading to cost reduction and resource optimization. Lastly, these techniques enable targeted marketing efforts and personalized customer experiences by leveraging data to understand consumer behaviour and preferences, ultimately driving customer satisfaction and loyalty.
2. The utilization of digital data analysis techniques spans across various
industries and sectors, each benefiting from the insights derived from data analysis. In the realm of business, organizations employ these techniques for market research, customer segmentation, and predictive analytics to gain a competitive edge and drive growth. Similarly, in healthcare, digital data analysis supports patient monitoring, disease prediction, and drug development, ultimately improving patient outcomes and advancing medical research. Financial institutions utilize these techniques for risk assessment, fraud detection, and portfolio management, safeguarding assets and ensuring financial stability. In academia, researchers utilize digital data analysis for research data analysis, trend identification, and hypothesis testing, contributing to the advancement of knowledge and understanding in their respective fields. Moreover, in governance, policymakers leverage data analysis for policy formulation, public opinion analysis, and performance evaluation, facilitating evidence-based decision-making and effective governance practices.

UNIT 16 DATA INTERPRETATION
Interpretation Structure
16.0 Introduction
16.1 Learning Outcomes
16.2 Introduction to Statistics
16.2.1 Populations and Samples
16.2.2 Scales of Measurement
16.2.3 Discrete and Continuous Variables
16.3 Frequency Distribution
16.3.1 Frequency Distribution Tables
16.3.2 Continuous Variables and Real Limits
16.3.3 Frequency Distribution Graphs
16.3.4 Histograms and Bar Graphs
16.3.5 Shape of a Frequency Distribution
16.4 Measures of Central Tendency
16.4.1 Mean
16.4.2 Median
16.4.3 Mode
16.5 Variability
16.5.1 Range
16.5.2 Interquartile Range and Semi-Interquartile Range
16.5.3 Standard Deviation and Variance for a Population
16.5.4 Standard Deviation and Variance for Samples
16.6 Let Us Sum Up
16.7 Further Readings
16.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
16.0 INTRODUCTION
Numbers are part of our daily life; we are used to coming across various sets of numbers, meaning something to us. For example, a mild earthquake measured 4 on the Richter scale hits a mountain region, but a severe 7-point Richter scale earthquake killed 100s of people. The difference between 4 and 7 numbers is just 3, but the difference in terms of magnitude - the former is a mild one, and the latter is a destructive force. So, numbers have meaning; when it comes to complex data sets, we need a scientific tool to classify and understand these data and make sense of them. The process of understanding data is data analysis, and the tool used to do this is statistics. In Communication Studies, statistical analysis is generally employed in quantitative settings, and it has a limited scope in qualitative research. In this Unit, we shall discuss different tools of descriptive statistical analysis in detail, using exercises.

Analysing and 16.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Interpreting Data
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Discuss the need for and importance of statistical analysis in communication research; * Describe Populations, Samples and Scales of measurement; * Explain Frequency Distribution; * Define Variability; * Discuss Standard Deviation and Variance for a population; * Explain measures of Central Tendency such as mean, mode and median; * Use the above statistical methods while analysing your data.
16.2 INTRODUCTION TO STATISTICS
Statistics is a branch of mathematical sciences which deals with numbers and data sets. A basic definition of statistics is "a process and tool involved in collection, analysis, interpretation, explanation and presentation of data." We can extract information from raw data through various statistical analysis tools and create a new understanding of numbers. Statistics help us to simplify complex data sets. Statistical tools help us to interpret and explain information. It helps us to make informed decisions and even helps us to predict a direction based on diverse data sets. Statistics are broadly classified into two types: descriptive statistics and inferential statistics. Descriptive statistics, as the name suggests, are meant to classify, and summarise collected raw data. Major kinds of analysis under descriptive statistics are measures of frequency, measures of central tendency, and measures of dispersion. The second type, inferential statistics, helps us draw conclusions from associations or differences between variables. As this Unit deals with the basic concepts of statistical applications, we shall focus on various analytical tools of descriptive statistics in detail through exercises.
16.2.1 Populations and Samples
Block 1, Unit 4 is devoted to sampling. You could go back to that Unit to refresh yourself on sampling. Here, just to recap, a population is the entire group of individuals that a researcher wishes to study. A sample is a subset of a population. It is drawn from out of the population as defined by the researcher according to the rules of sampling.
16.2.2 Scales of Measurement
Measurement is the heart and soul of research. One of the central characteristics of a quantitative study is the requirement to measure whatever you study: gender, occupation, height, weight, time, viewership, motivation, care, commitment, gratification, loyalty... etc. When measuring, we assign

numbers (1, 2, 3, etc) to variables and concepts under investigation. For Interpretation example, suppose you have a variable such as gender with two categories (female and male). In that case, you will measure it quantitatively by assigning a unique number to each of the two gender categories (you may assign number 1 to the female category and 2 to the male category). Numbers can also be placed into a scale based on their inherent characteristics, such as the kind of number. We will briefly look at numbers in terms of scale.
Nominal Scale
This is the lowest scale (or level) of measurement. At this level, each response category of a variable is assigned a unique number. For example, as discussed above, a variable such as gender with two response categories will assign a unique or distinct number to each category. At a nominal level, the category is used simply to describe. No mathematical relationships are possible at the nominal scale of measurement. You cannot add, subtract, multiply or divide. You can only count.
Ordinal Scale
The word 'ordinal' is derived from the word 'order'. In an ordinal measurement scale, numbers indicate only the rank order of cases (respondents) on some variable. For example, all students who pass an examination get an I, II or III class. In this case, you can say that a student who earned and I class fared better in the examination than a student who secured an II class; similarly, a student who passed in II class fared better than a student who passed in III class. That is, you can rank students according to their results. But you cannot say the distance (interval) between any two ranks.
Interval Scale
Interval measurement has the properties of the nominal and ordinal scales, plus the quality that equal intervals between numerals indicate equal distance in the measured variables. For example, if the temperature today is 20degC and on May 1 it was 40deg, then you can say that today is 20degC lower than May 1. In other words, with an interval scale, you can determine precisely which observation is of greater magnitude and by how much it is greater. You can do so by subtracting one number from the other. This tells us something important about interval scales: measurements on an interval scale permit basic arithmetic operation such as subtraction and addition. However, measurements on an interval scale do not allow you to multiply or divide. Let us explain this with the example of temperature: Assume the temperature is 20degC today and 40 degC on a given day in summer. The only statement you can make in this case is that the temperature difference between the two given dates is 20deg C. But you cannot say it is half as hot today as on a given day in summer. Why is it so? Because a ratio (20deg C: 40deg C) is meaningful only when the measurement scale has an absolute zero point 265

Analysing and that indicates the total absence of the measured concept. For example, zero
Interpreting Data
degrees on the Centigrade scale does not mean the absence of temperature. This point becomes clearer if you consider both temperatures measured on the Celsius and the Fahrenheit scales. Interval scales consist of numbers that rank items such that numerically equal distances on the scale represent equal distances in the measured property. However, the O on the scale is arbitrary; 0 does not have a true or absolute value, and it does not indicate the absence of the property measured. Ratio scale The fourth level, called ratio measurement, retains the properties of the three preceding scales plus has the additional property of an absolute zero point. Because a ratio scale of measurement has an absolute zero point, ratios of numbers on this scale reflect ratios of magnitudes. For example, the variable income, measured in rupees, has this property. If one person's annual income is ten lakhs and another person's annual income is 20 lakhs, you can divide one with the other (that is, form a ratio) to state that one is twice (or half) as much as the other. Ratio scales consist of numbers that rank items such that numerically equal distances on the scale represent equal distances in the measured property. Importantly, the O on the scale means the absence of the property being measured. Therefore, the 0 has real meaning.
16.2.3 Discrete and Continuous Variables
People who design research pay close attention to the classification of variables. Although one can classify variables differently, we will examine two types of variables here: discrete and continuous. Let us do so by looking at some questions first: * How many siblings do you have? * How many newspapers are published in your city? What is your marital status? The answer to each of the three questions is a whole number. A discrete variable consists of separate, indivisible categories. It cannot be divided into fractional parts. You can have two or three siblings, but you can't have 2.5 siblings, for example. A discrete variable has no intermediate values between two adjacent categories. Now, examine another set of questions you generally read in a questionnaire. What is your monthly household income? * What is your age?

Response to the two questions need not necessarily be whole numbers. Your Interpretation income can be measured in rupees and paise, and your age can be measured in years, months, days, and even minutes. So, the two variables in this instance (monthly household income (MHI) and age) are not discrete. Variables such as MHI, age, time, and weight are not limited to a fixed set of separate, indivisible categories. These variables are called continuous because they can be divided into infinite fractional parts. A continuous variable is divisible into an infinite number of fractional parts. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at this Unit's end.
Indicate the level of measurement of the following variables:
1. Employment status: working full-time, part-time, as a student,
housewife, or unemployed.

2. Religion: Christian, Muslim, Sikh, Jain, Hindu, other.

3. Gravity of crime: most serious, moderately serious, least serious.

4. Agreement or disagreement: Ask respondents to state their level of
agreement on a scale of strongly agree, somewhat agree, neutral, somewhat disagree, or strongly disagree.

5. Number of items purchased: Shoppers in a mall indicate the number of
items purchased there.

Analysing and 16.3 FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION
Interpreting Data
Working with a small dataset makes it easy to make sense of it. However, it is difficult to make sense of the data or see any pattern or trend in a large dataset (let's say more than 100 respondents have answered 70 questions on a questionnaire). This is where frequency distribution helps. Simply put, a frequency distribution organises the data as a table or graph, making it easier to see a clear pattern or trend. One of the most common procedures for organising a data set is to place the scores in a frequency distribution. A frequency distribution records the number of individuals located in each category on the scale of measurement. It allows the researcher to see "at a glance" the entire set of scores.
16.3.1 Frequency Distribution Tables
The simplest frequency distribution table presents the list of the individual scores in a column from highest to lowest. Besides each score, the frequency or number of times the scores occurred in the data is shown in another column. It is customary to use an X as the column heading for the scores and an/ as the column heading for the frequencies. Example: A class of 20 students' scores the following marks out of 10 (N = 20 scores). We will organise these scores by constructing a frequency distribution table. * First, identify the highest score in the set of scores. In this set, the highest score (X) is 10. * Next, identify the lowest score in the set of scores. In the set, it is (X) 4. * Write down the scores from the highest to the lowest (10 to 4) in a column, irrespective of whether a score appears in the set of scores (5 doesn't appear in the set of scores, but it is identified, as shown in the table). This is the first column in the table. * In the fourth step, against each number, count and write down the frequency (f) with which it appears. For example, ten appears twice, nine appears seven times, and so on. This is the second column of the table. * Finally, in the third column, multiply each X value by its frequency and then add these products. This gets the "X from a frequency distribution table. This sum may be expressed in symbols as "jX. In addition, by adding up the frequencies, you will obtain the total number of individuals: "f = N (20 students or scores in the example below)
Score Frequency Table Frequency Sum
X F fX 10 2 20 9 7 63 8 5 40 7 2 14

6 3 18 Interpretation 5 0 0 4 1 4 20 jX=l59
16.3.2 Continuous Variables and Real Limits
The concept of a continuous variable and real limits are useful in measurement. Let us, therefore, try to understand them with a simple example. How do you measure time and the number of subjects you study in any degree programme? If you have sophisticated instruments, you could measure time in years or even break it down into months, days, hours, minutes, seconds, or even nanoseconds. But you cannot do the same thing with the number of subjects you study in your degree programme. In the above example, time is a continuous variable. A continuous variable has an infinite number of possible values. It has no gaps in its scale (that is why it is continuous). Therefore, it may be represented by a continuous number line containing infinite points (see below). Let's take another example. When you measure body weight to the nearest kilogram, weights of 50.3 and 49.6 kgs would both be rounded to scores of X = 50. Note that a score of X = 50 is an approximate number; it is not a single point on the number line. The actual body weight is somewhere between 49.5 kgs and 50.5 kgs. Any measurement within this interval will be assigned a value of X = 50. The boundaries that form the interval are called the real limits of the interval corresponding to X = 50.
X F
X Y
12 - 13 4 10 - 11 5 8-9 3 6-7 3 4-5 2
49.6 50.3
I 49 51 49 51 52
49.5 50.5
Real Limits
Real limits are the boundaries of intervals for scores that are represented on a continuous number line. The real limits separating two adjacent scores are 269

Analysing and located exactly between the scores. Each score has two real limits. The upper
Interpreting Data
real limit is at the top, and the lower real limit is at the bottom of the interval. Real limits also apply to the class intervals of a grouped frequency distribution table. For example, a class interval of 40 - 49 contains scores from X = 40 to X= 49. These values are called the apparent limits of the interval because they appear to form the upper and lower boundaries for the class interval. But X = 40 is an interval from 39.5 to 40.5. Similarly, X = 49 is an interval from 48.5 to 49.5. Therefore, the real limits of the interval are
39.5 (the lower real limit) and 49.5 (the upper real limit).
16.3.3 Frequency Distribution Graphs
A frequency distribution graph is a pictorial representation of the data shown in a frequency distribution table. All the graphs start with perpendicular lines called axes. The horizontal line is the X-axis, and the vertical line is the Y- axis. The scores are listed along the X-axis, increasing value from left to right. The frequencies are listed on the Y-axis in increasing value from bottom to top. Generally, the point where the two axes intersect should have a zero value for both the scores and the frequencies. A final general rule is that the graph should be constructed so that its height (Y-axis) is approximately three-quarters of its length (X-axis).
16.3.4 Histograms and Bar Graphs
For this type of graph, you simply draw a bar above each score so that the bar's height corresponds to the score's frequency. The measurement scale determines the choice between using a histogram or a bar graph. When a frequency distribution graph shows data from an interval or ratio scale, the bars are drawn so that adjacent bar touches each other. The touching bars produce a continuous figure, emphasising the variable's continuity. This type of frequency distribution graph is called a histogram. For a histogram, vertical bars are drawn above each score so that.
1. The height of the bar corresponds to the frequency.
2. The width of the bar extends to the real limits of the score.
3. E.g., Frequency Distribution Histogram.
For example, a frequency distribution histogram is used for grouped data.

Interpretation
X F
6 1 5 2 4 2 3 4 2 2 1 1 When presenting the frequency distribution for data from a nominal or ordinal scale, the graph is constructed so there is some space between the bars. In this case, the bars emphasise that the scale consists of separate, distinct categories. The resulting graph is called a bar graph. For a bar graph, a vertical bar is drawn above each score (or category) so that.
1. The height of the bar corresponds to the frequency
2. There is a space separating each bar from the text.
For example, a bar graph shows the distribution of personality types in a sample of college students. The graph is drawn with space between the bars because personality type is a discrete variable measured on a nominal scale.
16.3.5 Shape of a Frequency Distribution
Three characteristics completely describe any distribution: Shape, central tendency, and variability. We will later examine central tendency and variability. Let's try to understand the shape of the distribution now. Nearly all distributions can be classified as being either symmetrical or skewed. 271

Analysing and * In a symmetrical distribution, it is possible to draw a vertical line through
Interpreting Data
the middle so that one side of the distribution is an exact mirror image of the other. * In a skewed distribution, scores tend to pile up toward one end of the scale and taper off gradually at the other end. The section where the scores taper off towards one end of a distribution is called the tail of the distribution. A skewed distribution with the tail to the right-hand side is said to be positively skewed because the tail points toward the positive (above zero) end of the X-axis. If the tail points to the left, the distribution is said to be negatively skewed.
Symmetrical Distribution
Positive and Negative Skew
Check Your Progress: 2 Find frequency distribution for Male journalists, Female journalists, and Total Journalists.
S.No. Age Intervals Male Female
1 Under20 0 100
2 21-25 17 83 3 26-30 40 60 4 31-35 35 65 5 36-40 51 49 6 41-45 48 52 7 46-50 55 45 8 51-55 56 44 9 56-60 53 47 10 61-65 56 44
11 Over 65 67 33

Find frequency distribution for Girls, Boys and Total Class. The dataset is Interpretation about the time a class of students spends watching television programmes in a month.
S.No. Time Intervals Girls Boys
1 140-149 0 0 2 130-139 0 32 3 120-129 0 48 4 110-119 1 29 5 100-109 0 18 6 90-99 3 14 7 80-89 5 5 8 70-79 6 5 9 60-69 14 0 10 50-59 7 1 11 40-49 11 0 12 30-39 4 0
16.4 MEASURES OF CENTRAL TENDENCY
You are quite familiar with what an average is and how it is calculated. When asked to calculate the average, most of us rush into calculating the mean. But this isn't exactly the only meaning of the 'average'. In statistics, you can calculate the so-called average in three different ways. Collectively, these three - mean, medium, and mode, are called measures of central tendency. You can pretty much guess what central tendency is. As the phrase connotes, the central tendency is an average that resides in the centre or represents the centre of the distribution. Measures of central tendency give us a number that describes where the centre lies. Knowing the centre of a distribution tells us a great deal about a distribution because most of the scores in a distribution tend to cluster around the centre.
16.4.1 Mean
The mean is the arithmetic centre of the distribution. You can find the mean by adding all the scores (OX) together and dividing the total by the number of scores (N). For example (X = scores 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; N=5): Xare 1+2+3+4+5 = (OX) 15 N=5 The population mean(u) is: 15/5 = 3 (u = OX/NJ. The sample mean (n) is: 15/5. = 3 (x = OX/n) You may now note that the procedure we used to calculate the mean of the population and the sample is the same, but we have used different symbols for them.

Analysing and We now know how the mean is calculated. Means have four properties. Here
Interpreting Data
are four of them:
1. The mean is the most reliable and often used central tendency measure.
2. The mean need not be an actual score in the distribution.
3. Outliers strongly influence the mean.
4. The sum of the deviations about the mean must always be equal to zero.
You should understand the last two properties of the mean listed above. First, you should know that an outlier is an extreme score. It is a score that stands apart from most of the scores in the distribution. Thus, in a set of scores 1, 2, and 9, score 9 is an outlier. Outliers tend to pull the mean towards them. Thus, a distribution of values 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 averages 3. Three does a good job of describing where most of the scores in this distribution lie. However, if there is an outlier, say 25 (instead of 5) in the above distribution, the mean changes greatly. The new distribution 1, 2, 3, 4, 25 has a mean of 7. Seven is not close to most of the other values in the distribution. Thus, the mean is a poor measure of the centre when we have outliers.
16.4.2 Median
The median is the physical centre of the distribution. It is the value in the middle when the distribution values are arranged sequentially. The distribution 0, 1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 5, 7, 8 has a median value of 4 because five values are above this point and five values are below this point (0, 1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 5, 7, 8). If you have an even set of numbers, then there will be two values at the centre, and you will average these two values together to determine the median. For example, if we take out one of the numbers in the distribution so that we have 0, 1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 5, 7, then the two values in the centre are 3 and 4 (0, 1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 5, 7). The average is 3.5, and that is the median. You would have noticed that the median is resistant to outliers. That is, outliers will generally not affect the median and will not be affected as much as the mean. The median might move slightly toward the skew or outliers in the distribution.
16.4.3 Mode
The mode is the most frequent score in the distribution. Examine the following scores. 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 4, 5, 6, 7. What score appears most often in the distribution? 4. Hence, 4 is the mode. This distribution of scores has only one mode (4). Now examine another set of scores: 1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 4, 5, 6. Here, 3 and 4 appear four times each. Therefore, there are two modes (3 and 4) in the set of scores.

Now consider this set of scores: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Here each score Interpretation appears only once; no score appears twice or more. Therefore, you conclude there is no mode in the set of scores. You would have again noticed another characteristic of mode: it remains unaffected by outliers.
1. students were asked to select their favourite subject in a class. 63
students chose English, 29 chose Maths and 9 chose Statistics. What is the mode of this distribution?
2. Why do extreme scores (outliers) not affect the median?
Check Your Progress: 3 Find the mode, median, and mean of the following: a) 19,24,28,28,30,34,38,42,49,51,52,61,64

b) 53,43, 77,44,35, 14,56,43, 75,45,80

c) 14,25,47,56,56,58,58,66,82,89,91

d) 61,52,81,56,35,17,56,51,82,35

e) 31,44,45,46,43,55,56,56,57,62,64,66,69

16.5 VARIABILITY
Our education and experience enable us to understand what a mean is. However, understanding the concept of variability doesn't come to us so easily. Variability, in simple English, refers to difference (or distance). So, if a population of 10 students' scores 10 out of 10, it certainly is a great performance, but there is no difference in the score of the 10 students. They

Analysing and have all scored the same marks! The statistician would say the same thing in
Interpreting Data
a different language (there is no variability in the distribution of (10) scores, she would say). On the other hand, if the ten students score 1 through 10, there would be great variability. In statistics, our goal is to measure the amount of variability for a particular set of scores. If the scores in a distribution are all the same, then there is no variability. If differences between scores are small, then the variability is small, and if differences between scores are large, then the variability is large. In our everyday language, 'small' and 'big' are qualitative expressions. Each person has their own subjective measure of what these two words mean. In statistics, though, variability is quantitatively measured and expressed. Why do we measure variability? We measure variability to determine how spread out a distribution of scores is. The purpose is to find out whether the scores are all close to each other (for example: 2, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5) or are scattered over a wide range of values (0, 0, 1, 2, 6, 9). Variability does much more than describe a set of scores. It helps us understand two additional characteristics of the distribution. First, variability tells us how well the mean (average) describes the distribution. If the variability is small, the scores are all close together, and each score is close to the mean (calculate the mean of the first set of scores and see this for yourself). In this situation, the mean is a good representative of all the scores in the distribution. On the other hand, when variability is large, the scores are all spread out and are not necessarily close to the mean (calculate the mean of the second set of scores). Is the mean of the second set of scores a good representative of the distribution as the mean of the first set? The second characteristic of variability is kind of related to the first. Variability also tells us how well an individual score (or group of scores) represents the entire distribution. In the first set of scores (2, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5), the distance of any individual score (2, 4 or 5) is not too far from the rest of the scores. In this case, 2 or 4 or 5 nearly accurately represent the entire distribution. Can you say the same thing about the second distribution? Does any individual score represent the entire distribution? We can't be so certain here or as certain as we are with the first set of scores. Now, with this little theoretical background, let's determine how variability is calculated. There are three different measures of variability: the range, the interquartile range, and the standard deviation. Let's look at each of them.
16.5.1 Range
The range is the distance (or difference) between the largest and smallest scores in the distribution. So, the range of the two scores above is 3 and 9, respectively. (To be accurate, the range is the difference between the upper real limit for the largest (maximum) X value and the lower real limit for the smallest (minimum) X value). You can perhaps see the difficulty of using range as a measure of variability. It seeks inputs from only two extreme values (scores) at the cost of all other

values in the distribution. In other words, it often does not accurately describe Interpretation the variability for the entire distribution. For this reason, the range is considered a crude and unreliable measure of variability.
16.5.2 Interquartile Range and Semi-Interquartile Range
The second measure of variability is the interquartile range (or semi-quartile range). Using quartiles, you can divide a distribution into four equal parts (for easier understanding, think of dividing 100 into four equal parts!). The first quartile (Q1) is the score that separates the lower 25% of the distribution from the remaining 75%. The second quartile (Q2) is the score with exactly two quartiles or 50% of the distribution below it. The second quartile is the median (they are the same). Finally, the third quartile (Q3) is the score that divides the bottom 75 per cent of the distribution from the top 25 per cent. The semi-quartile range is one-half of the Interquartile range. It provides a descriptive measure of scores' "typical" distance from the median (Q2). The Interquartile range is the distance between the first and third quartiles. Interquartile range = Q3 - Q1 When the Interquartile range is used to describe variability, it is commonly transformed into the semi-interquartile range, which is simply one-half of the Interquartile range. (Q3 - Ql) Semi-interquartile range= ------------ Because the semi-interquartile range focuses on the middle 50% of the distribution, it is less likely to be influenced by extreme scores, giving a more stable measure of variability than the range. However, much like the range, the semi-interquartile range does not consider the actual distances between individual scores. In other words, it doesn't tell us how scattered or clustered the scores are. For example, Q2 (the middle quartile) is the median. Ql (the lower quartile) is the median of the numbers to the left of or below Q2. Q3 (the upper quartile) is the median of the numbers to the right of or above Q2. Example: Find the lower, middle, and upper quartiles of the data 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32 Since the data is already in ascending order, find the median. 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32 22 is the median; therefore, Q2= 22 The median of the numbers to the left of Q2: 12, 14, 16, 18, 20 16 is the median; therefore, Q1 = 16 The median of the numbers to the right of Q2: 24, 26, 28, 30, 32 28 is the median; therefore, Q3 = 28

Analysing and The inter-quartile range of a distribution is the difference between the upper
Interpreting Data
and lower quartiles. That is, inter quartile range= Q3 - Ql Since, Q3 = 28 and Ql = 16 Inter quartile range (Q2) = 28 - 16 = 12 The semi-interquartile distribution range is half the difference between the upper and lower quartiles or half the interquartile range. Therefore, from the example above, the interquartile range is 12. (Q3 - Ql) 12 Therefore, Semi Interquartile range = -------- = ---- = 6 2 2
16.5.3 Standard Deviation and Variance for a Population
Now, we come to the third measure of variability: the standard deviation. Unlike the first two measures of variability, the standard deviation considers the distances between individual scores. So, naturally, it tells us something important that the two other previous measures don't: how scattered or clustered the scores are in a distribution. Well, by now, you must be wondering how one calculates the distance between individual scores. Think of it this way. How is the distance measured in a city? The standard way of measuring distance is from one central point to another. The same logic is used in calculating the standard deviation. The central point, in this instance, is the mean. So, we measure the deviation of the scores from the mean. Standard means typical; the deviation is the distance from the mean The standard deviation can be measured in six simple steps. Let us illustrate this using a set of scores (2, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5). Step 1 is to add up the scores. 2 + 4 + 4 + 4 + 5 + 5 = 24 Step 2 is to compute the mean of the set of scores. You do this by dividing the total (24) by the number of scores (N = 6)
24 I 6 = 4
Step 3 is to calculate the mean of the deviation scores. To do this, subtract the mean from each score and add the deviation scores. 2-4 = -2
4-4 = O
4-4 = O
4-4 = O
5-4 = 1 5-4 = 1

When you do this, you end up with zero (because -2 and + 2 cancel each Interpretation other out). You will observe that the distances above the mean are equal to those below the mean. This will always be so. Therefore, the mean deviation score provides no information about variability. Step 4 allows you to overcome this by squaring the difference between the mean and individual scores (squaring helps eliminate the + and--signs) and adding them up. You get when you do this for the set of scores in the example. 2-4 = -2 = 4 4-4 = 0 = 0 4-4 = 0 = 0 4-4 = 0 = 0 5-4 = 1 = 1 5-4 = 1 = 1 At this step, you have eliminated the signs and can add up the squared deviation scores to get a value that is not zero (in this case, 6). Several textbooks call this the Sum of Squares or SS. The sum of Squares is an important concept used in several statistical tests. You must remember what it is and how it is calculated. The sum of squares (SS) is the sum of the squared deviation scores. Step 5 takes us to another important concept called variance. You compute variance by dividing the sum of squares by N. In the example,
6 I 6 = 1. This is the variance.
Variance is the mean of the squared deviation scores. The final step, Step 6, requires taking the square root of the variance. Standard Deviation = v variance Standard deviation is the square root of the variance In the example, 1 = 1 Why do you take the square root of the variance? You do it because you had squared the deviation scores in Step 4. Remember, you had done it because you would have otherwise ended up with zero as variability. You then squared the deviation scores to get over this difficulty. Now, you would like to remove the influence of squaring the deviation scores to obtain the standard deviation. You do this by taking the square root of variance in Step 6.

Analysing and The concept of standard deviation (or variance) is the same for a sample as
Interpreting Data
for a population; however, the details of calculations differ slightly depending on whether you have sample data or a complete population. Below are the formulas for calculating the sum of squares, variance, and standard deviation of a population of scores. The sum of squares (SS) is the sum of the squared deviation scores. SS = I (X - u)2 or SS = SS Population variance = cr2 = N SS Population standard deviation = cr = N E.g. For the following population of scores, calculate SS, Variance and
Standard Deviation
2, 10, 6, 9, 8, 7
16.5.4 Standard Deviation and Variance for Samples
Variance and standard deviation for sample data have the same basic definitions as they do for populations: To compute these, we first need to find SS, the sum of squared deviations. The formulas we use to compute sample SS are identical to those used for populations. Definitional formula: SS = I (X - X}2
I X2 - (I X)2
Computational formula: SS = ---------------- N Note that the difference between these formulas and the population formulas is minor. We have substituted in place of and n in place of. The difference in notation will not affect the calculations. It is necessary to adjust the formulas for sample variance and standard deviation to correct the bias in sample variability. This is done by replacing n with n-1: Sample variance = S2 = SS n- 1 Sample standard Deviation (S) is simply the square root of the variance. SS Sample standard Deviation = S = ------ n-1 Dividing the sum of squares in the numerator by n-1 instead of n increases the value you will obtain. The adjustment makes sample variability an accurate or unbiased estimator of population variability. For this reason, sample variance is often called estimated population variance, and the sample

standard deviation is called estimated population standard deviation. Interpretation Check Your Progress: 4 Find the Range, Quartile Range, Variance and Standard Deviation of the following:
1) 5,14,13, 9, 7, 7, 8, 6,12

2) 15, 18,9,23, 18

3) 9,3,9,6,6,9

4) 28,39,42,29,39,40,36,46,41,30

5) 133,215,250,108,206,159,206,178

6) 76,94, 76,82,78,86,90

7) 52,61,49,52,49,52,41, 58

8) 58,59,63,45,44,41,36,36

9) 29,29,31,41,42,43,31,29,23,25

10) 59,54,37,45,31,60,32,34

Analysing and 16.6 LET US SUM UP
Interpreting Data
In this Unit, we explained the basic analytical tools under the descriptive statistics category. We discussed the fundamental concepts of quantitative research. The basic concept of quantitative techniques is to make generalisations of research findings based on a group of samples. Statistics plays a crucial role in the generalisation process. We also discussed the building blocks of measurements - Nominal, Ordinal, Interval and Ratio. Before collecting any quantitative data for a study, the researcher should decide the nature of the statistical applications s/he will employ. This determines the nature and need of the scale of measurements in data collection instruments. These measurements would generate a different data set, and how it can be classified as continuous and discrete variables were discussed. It was further outlined how these data can be classified and summarised in the form of frequency distributions, with the nature and types of graphical presentation of data, measures of central tendency--mean, median, and mode--and measures of dispersion--range, quartile, variance, and standard deviation. It is hoped that you will be able to use the above statistical methods to analyse your data when embarking on your research journey.
16.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Dayal, M. (2017). Media Metrics: An Introduction to Quantitative
Research in Mass Communication, SAGE Texts
2. Rajagopalan (2012), Statistical Inference, Prentice Hall India Leaming
Private Limited
3. Rajaratnam T. (2015), Statistics for Social Sciences, SAGE Publishing
India Kanji, G. K. (2006), 100 statistical tests, Sage
16.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Nominal
2. Ordinal
3. Ratio
Check Your Progress: 2 1.
S.No. Age Intervals Male Male% Female Female%
1 Under 20 0 0 100 16
2 21-25 17 4 83 13

3 26-30 40 8 60 10 Interpretation 4 31-35 35 7 65 10 5 36-40 51 11 49 8 6 41-45 48 10 52 8 7 46-50 55 12 45 7 8 51-55 56 12 44 7 9 56-60 53 11 47 8 10 61-65 56 12 44 7
11 Over 65 67 14 33 5
Total 478 100 622 100 478+622=1100 43.5 56.5 2.
S.No. Time Intervals Girls Girls% Boys Boys%
1 140-149 0 0.00 0 0.00 2 130-139 0 0.00 32 21.05 3 120-129 0 0.00 48 31.58 4 110-119 1 1.96 29 19.08 5 100-109 0 0.00 18 11.84 6 90-99 3 5.88 14 9.21 7 80-89 5 9.80 5 3.29 8 70-79 6 11.76 5 3.29 9 60-69 14 27.45 0 0.00 10 50-59 7 13.73 1 0.66 11 40-49 11 21.57 0 0.00 12 30-39 4 7.84 0 0.00 Total 51 100.00 152 100.00 51 + 152 = 203 25.12 74.88 Check Your Progress: 3
Q. No Mean median mode Q. No
1 40 38 28 1 2 51.4 45 53 2 3 58.4 58 56, 58 3 4 52.6 54 56 4 5 53.4 56 56 5

Analysing and Check Your Progress: 4
Interpreting Data
Q. No Range Quartile Range Variance Standard
0deg/o,25deg/o,50deg/o, Deviation 75deg/o,100deg/o 1 5, 14 5, 7, 8, 12, 14 10.5 3.24 2 9,23 9, 15, 18, 18, 23 26.3 5.13 3 3,9 3, 6, 7.5, 9, 9 6 2.45 4 28,46 28,31.5,39,40.75,46 37.1 6.1 5 108,250 108, 152.5, 192,208.25, 250 2183.84 46.73 6 76,94 76, 77,82,88,94 50.48 7.10 7 41,61 41, 49, 52, 53.5, 61 36.5 6.04 8 36,63 36, 39.75, 44.5, 58.25, 63 115.36 10.74 9 23,43 23, 29, 30, 38.5, 43 51.12 7.15 10 31,60 31, 33.50, 41, 55.25, 60 149.14 12.21

UNIT 17 REPORT WRITING
Structure
17.0 Introduction
17.1 Learning Outcomes
17.2 Stages in Report Writing
17.3 The Beginning
17.3.1 The Title
17.3.2 Abstract
17.3.3 Acknowledgements
17.3.4 List of contents
17.3.5 Introduction
17.4 Main Body of the Report
17.4.1 Literature Review
17.4.2 Objectives
17.4.3 Methodology
17.4.4 Sampling and Sample
17.4.5 Research Instruments
17.4.6 Data Presentation
17.4.7 Findings and Analysis
17.5 The Final Section
17.5.1 Summary
17.5.2 Conclusions
17.5.3 Recommendations
17.5.4 Appendix
17.5.5 References
17.6 Effective Writing
17.7 Let Us Sum Up
17.8 Keywords
17.9 Further Readings
17.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
17.0 INTRODUCTION
Report writing is both an art and a craft. In the previous Blocks and Units, you have learnt the whole process of communication research, research methods, and data analysis. This unit focuses on bringing it all together in the form of a report that reflects your work. It presents the report to the reader, detailing what it means and what you have found during the research process. A report is a structured, formal document written to convey factual, research- based information. This information is often used as the basis for making decisions and acting. Research reports generally follow a particular standardised structure and format, which are described and discussed in this unit.

Analysing and 17.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Interpreting Data
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Outline major components of a research report: * discuss various stages in research report writing and * write good research report.
17.2 STAGES IN REPORT WRITING
The following stages are involved in writing a report: * Planning the report * Organising the information * Structuring the information * Writing the first draft * Checking and revising * Writing the final version Planning your work: You will be writing a report for a reason. The best reports are the ones that are clear and purposeful, so you need to ask yourself: * Who am I writing for? * Why am I writing this? * What am I trying to say? * How should I be saying it? A report usually falls into one of the following categories: Informative - presents statements of fact and opinions. Persuasive- tries to obtain approval from the reader or advocates a position. Explanatory - answers given questions and gives a conclusion. Operational - records an event and gives evidence of work done. Which category does your report fall into? Activity: 1 Answer the following four questions: Who am I writing this report for? Why am I writing this? What am I trying to say? How should I be saying it? A report informs the readers and, if it is logically presented, can be extremely useful to both the reader and the writer. It is a more structured form of writing than, say, an essay and is designed so that it can be read quickly and accurately, though reports may not necessarily be read in a consecutive order. Structure and convention in written reports stress the processes by which the information was gathered as much as the information itself. Reports should be organised for the convenience of the intended reader. These are written on 286 a wide range of

subjects for various reasons. A research report follows the general principles and standard structure of general report writing.
Format of the Report
Over the years, a standard format for reports has been worked out. Although there may be circumstances when it is advisable to change the format to fit a particular need, generally, the structure is common. The standard sections of a report are as follows:
The Beginning
The main body of the report The Final section Let us discuss each section in detail.
17.3 THE BEGINNING
The Beginning of the report contains the following: Title Page, Abstract or Executive Summary, Table of contents, List of tables, List of figures, and Introduction. Let us examine each section of a report in greater detail.
17.3.1 The Title
The report title is the first thing a reader sees. It tells them of the report's content and should thus be precise, clear, and concise; it should also give the reader ample information to differentiate it from other reports on similar subjects.
17.3.2 Abstract
An abstract, sometimes called the Executive Summary in a report to an organisation, is an independent text written in a brief, non-repetitive style containing the essential details of the research presented in the report. It offers a quick way for the reader to decide whether the report is relevant for him/her and whether it contributes important knowledge/key results/valuable scientific methods. An abstract is usually written for a wider readership than the report. You should not include extensive background, literature review, detailed methods, figures, or references. Also, generally, you should not add any material not in the report. For short reports, about 150 words are enough; for a longer report, the abstract should not exceed one page. An executive summary may be longer, but it is never two or three pages long. Typically, abstracts of research reports, including dissertations, are often made publicly available on the Internet, enabling anyone interested in the subject to review and see if the content is relevant to their research.
17.3.3 Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements are an important part of the research report, and you can thank those who have helped you in any way during the research work. In an academic report, they are generally your research guide, as well as the department's faculty, administrative, and support staff. In addition to people, you may thank organisations, institutions, or libraries you visited for material

Analysing and collection. They can also be people who have extended you emotional
Interpreting Data
support, such as your family, friends, and near and dear ones. You should not forget to thank the respondents if your study is based on field research, as there will be no study without them. You should be generous in your approach but not gush and make it sentimental. Using various words and expressions for different sets of people adds to the impact of your acknowledgement section.
17.3.4 List of Contents
The list or table of contents helps the reader find specific sections of the report at one glance. The contents are presented at the beginning of the report as a list of section and sub-section headings, along with the corresponding page numbers.
17.3.5 Introduction
This section broadly introduces the research by outlining its rationale, aims and objectives. The purpose of the introduction is to set the scene for your readers, so they know what to expect from the report. The introduction an- answers the following questions: * Why is the report being written? * What kinds of information does it contain? * How is the problem being approached? * For whom is the report being written? It is often useful to try a three-paragraph approach to your initial report writing: Paragraph 1 - What are you investigating, and why is it interesting? Paragraph 2 - What information is already known on the topic? Paragraph 3 - What were the aims of the study you have just done? Ensure you connect the paragraphs with a linking sentence following the fundamentals of good writing. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1. What are the three key sections of a research report?

2. Describe the sub-sections in the three key sections of the research report.

17.4 MAIN BODY OF THE REPORT
The body of the report includes several important sections - theoretical framework, literature review, research design, objectives, methodology, sampling and sample, research tools, data collection process, findings and analysis, and interpretation. The body presents the actual content of the report and describes the subject matter. Being the most extensive section of a report, it answers several questions like, "What did I do?" "How did I do it?" "What did I do it with?" and "What did I find? "The section should have detailed information on what you have done so that the reader understands it clearly, can replicate the tests if required, and can check their validity. Now, let us understand some of the important sections of the main body of the report in detail.
17.4.1 Literature Review
In this section of the report, one locates and reviews the articles, reports, and documents related to or about the research topic or question under consideration. This section also gives an insight into the theoretical framework that may have been used previously and how that could help you relate, generate, and base your research on a sound theoretical base. In Block 1, Unit 5, we discussed how the literature review is done. In this section of your report, you must present the findings of the survey of the literature, summarise previous research, and place the review in the context of your work. From this context, you can connect your research to previous work, clarify the gaps in the field, and justify your research. This section is not a listing of what research was done by author or title; rather, it is a compelling argument connecting your work to that of others. The literature survey is organised around ideas and themes, and you should conclude what you have learned from reviewing the literature so far. After reading your review, your reader should be convinced that your proposed research project will be necessary to further knowledge in your field.
17.4.2 Objectives
The section on objectives draws the reader's attention to the specific issue under study. Though each research study has its specific purpose, we may think of research objectives as falling into several broad groupings: * To gain familiarity with a phenomenon or to achieve new insights into it. Studies with this object in view are termed exploratory or formative research studies. * To accurately portray the characteristics of a particular individual, situation or group, studies with this object in mind are known as descriptive research studies. * To determine the frequency with which something occurs or is associated with something else. Such studies are known as diagnostic research studies.

Analysing and * To test a hypothesis of a causal relationship between variables. These
Interpreting Data
types of research studies are called hypothesis-testing research studies. The objectives of the given research must be stated in unambiguous terms. Following the statement of objectives, the hypotheses to be studied should also be stated clearly.
17.4.3 Methodology
The first section of the Methodology chapter provides a broad picture of the study's approach. Here, you need to state whether the study is exploratory, historical, descriptive, ethnographic, or experimental. Each approach carries with it a set of methods that are usually followed. Once you have defined the approach, you can describe what methods and tools you will be using.
17.4.4 Sampling and Sample
It would help to describe the study population as explained in Units 4 and 14. Then, describe the sample size, what kind of sampling procedure was followed, and how exactly the sample was drawn and why. At this stage, a flow chart would give a graphic description of the sampling process. You should also outline the sampling error or confidence interval (discussed in Block 1, Unit 4). Describe what problems were identified and how they were addressed in sampling from the population to help the reader understand the sampling context. For example, in an experimental design, you must describe how you selected the subjects and placed them in either the control or experimental group.
17.4.5 Research Instruments
Before describing your research instruments, the report must state the 'unit of study' and the 'unit of analysis'. Let us understand this with an example. If you are conducting a survey, the unit of study is the individual respondent, whether it is a questionnaire or an interview schedule. However, when you report your data, you will report results in broad categories and groups. These broad categories are your unit of analysis. The next step is to describe your research instruments, such as the questionnaire, interview schedule, attitude scale, or knowledge test (in an experimental design). Describe the structure of the instrument and what each section contains. Place the research instruments in the Appendix. You also need to describe how the instruments were pretested and administered by mail, telephone, online, as individual interviews, or in groups of people and/or when the knowledge test or attitude scale was administered. You may mention any limitations you faced when you collected data to place the research you have done within a context. Mention any limitations you faced in the field during data collection. For instance, these could be smaller samples, low survey response rates, respondents' resistance to answering your questions, or even problems with human resources and logistics, which may have impacted the overall findings. Writing this here helps the reader understand why the research may

have deviated from the original design and helps to place the findings in context.
17.4.6 Data Presentation
Describe the data processing operations regarding sifting, checking for accuracy, classification, and categorisation. * Sifting is a process of examining the collected raw data to detect errors and omissions and correct them when possible. * Classification- the process you followed in arranging data in groups or classes based on common characteristics. * Categorisation according to attributes--here, data is analysed based on common characteristics, which can either be descriptive, such as literacy, sex, religion, etc., or numerical, such as weight, height, income, etc. You can also include the data levels used (discussed in Unit 14) and whether the data were nominal, ordinal, interval, or ratio. Such classification can be either: * Simple classification: We consider only one attribute and divide the universe into two classes--one class consisting of items possessing the given attribute and the other class consisting of items that do not possess the given attribute. * Manifold classification: Here, we consider two or more attributes simultaneously and divide the data into several classes. * Classification according to class intervals is done with data relating to income, age, weight, tariff, production, occupancy, etc. Such quantitative data are known as the statistics of variables and are classified based on class intervals. You also need to describe the data analysis methods used and the statistical procedures followed in the study. In this section, you would describe what statistics you used; for example, are they just frequency distributions describing the data, or did you test the data for association or significance? If you tested the data, describe the tests and how you calculated significance. In this section, you need to justify your choice of statistics and/or, in the case of qualitative data, how you analysed the data and presented your data.
17.4.7 Findings and Analysis
In this part of the report, you must present all the evidence collected for your research. You should ensure that the information is organised logically so that conclusions can be drawn naturally from the facts presented. The findings may be structured in the following ways. Describe the real sample in the first part of the findings and analysis section. The final sample of your study is never the original sample drawn; the real sample is always lower than what you planned. If you have a 15 per cent response rate on your questionnaire-based survey, say so. The quality of your findings depends on this information.

Analysing and * You might want to present the demographics in one or many tables. If
Interpreting Data
possible, collapse the demographics table into one where a full sample picture emerges. Always present a table first, describe and explain the findings regarding the most important factor first, and proceed to the least important. For instance, "70 per cent of the sample agreed that. . ." and then proceeded with lesser percentages and numbers. Give both percentages and frequencies (n) here. * The second section of the findings and analysis section focuses on the research questions and hypotheses being tested. Again, present your data in a sequence of each hypothesis listed, with the tables showing the results (measures of central tendency, dispersion, variation, association, and significance). Display the table first, then analyse the results to determine whether the hypothesis is upheld or disproved. Never place a table without an explanation. * Tables, graphs, and diagrams are useful for presenting information in a manner that is easily understood. If the information being presented through these tools is necessary to prove the study's main objective, then it is prudent to place it within the main text or the body. If not, these can be placed at the end of the report in an appendix. Also, you should ensure that tables and diagrams are properly labelled, and the information is presented systematically to not confuse the reader. * Do not report unnecessary data. Just because you collected vast amounts of information during your fieldwork and analysed it, you do not have to report all of it. Excess information will clutter your findings. You can use the additional data for other research papers. * Do not include any opinions in this section--report only what you find. Your opinions do not belong here, and they will only distract the reader from your research study's main objectives and hypotheses. As the writer, it is your job to present the facts and evidence related to the subject of your study to the readers. With that in view, it is not enough to just present a graph or table and expect your reader to pick out what is important. Therefore, you must include some discussion of the facts, but to repeat, there are no opinions or judgments about the findings. In this section, discuss your findings in terms of their relationship to your study's objectives and previous literature on the subject. You can include the reasons for the similarities or differences between previous research studies. You must link your study to the body of theory and research already conducted because it brings continuity, and the cumulative nature of research adds value to your hard work. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. List the sub-sections of the Main body of the report.

2. What is a literature review?

3. What are the different ways of data presentation?

17.5 THE FINAL SECTION
The final section of the report presents a summary and conclusions of the report. It also comprises recommendations, an appendix, references and/or a bibliography.
17.5.1 Summary
In this section, you should summarise your report in terms of what you had set out to do, what you did, how you went about your research, and what your findings were - be brief here; no need to elaborate. Readers often look at this section before proceeding to the main body of your work, so all necessary information should be repeated here.
17.5.2 Conclusions
The conclusions should arise naturally from the evidence presented in the previous sections. You may include, for example, statements on what has happened, what the situation is and what might happen. You may also consider further action that could be taken, as well as an analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of various courses of action. If appropriate, you should give your recommendation, considering your experience and the evidence you have presented, of a preferred course of action. Suppose any gaps in your knowledge prevent you from concluding. In that case, you should clarify and perhaps outline what further investigations would be necessary to provide fuller information. You should not include any new information that does not appear in the main body of the report and should not make statements that you cannot support with the evidence.
17.5.3 Recommendations
It is not always necessary to present recommendations in a report, but if they are included, they should flow logically from the study's findings and conclusions. Usually, the recommendations are set out as brief statements and suggestions for further research.
17.5.4 Appendix
The appendix is the section of the report that contains all the secondary or marginal information which does not directly influence the central objective of your study. This information is presented separately so as not to overload

Analysing and your main argument. Texts of questionnaires, interview questions and
Interpreting Data
transcripts, specification sheets, etc., can be presented in the appendix if needed. Some of the other materials that may be included are as follows: Glossary: It contains the meanings and explanations of the technical terms used throughout the study and is best presented in an Appendix. A glossary of terms is especially useful when presenting a technical study to people who may not be subject experts. The terms and their concise definitions are listed alphabetically in this section. You may also include acronyms, i.e. short forms for names of organisations in this section. Tables: When presenting a study with a lot of statistical data, it is not always possible to present all of it in the main body. In such a scenario, the data is placed together in an Appendix. When presenting data through tables in an Appendix, it is important to give them clear numbers and titles and present them in the order of their reference in the text. Diagrams and Illustrations: Like tables, diagrams can also be presented within the main text. But, if the writer feels that this disrupts the text too much, the diagrams and illustrations may be presented in the Appendix.
17.5.5 References
All references should be given in full and in alphabetical order. For detailed guidelines on punctuation, capitalisation, and abbreviations in reference citations, see APA, MLA, Harvard, Chicago, CSE, or other relevant manuals. The organisation for which the report is being prepared will have its style manual. Ask for it and follow it carefully. Book: The author's surname is written first, followed by the initials or the full first name, the date of publication, the complete title of the book, the edition, the place of publication, and the publisher. Journal article: the author's surname with initials or the complete first name; date of the journal's publication; full title of the article (in quotation marks); journal name (in italics); volume and issue number of the journal; page numbers on which the article can be found. Electronic or Website reference: The general principle in APA style is to include the same information as you would for a print source, in the same order, and add just enough information about finding the source electronically to help your reader find that reference. If an online source has a digital object identifier (DOI), a permanent identifier for an electronic publication, you should use that instead of a URL. Also, cite the date on which you accessed the document. A Note about Plagiarism Research-based writing in Indian or international institutions, both educational and corporate, is filled with rules that writers, particularly beginners, are not aware of or don't know how to follow. Many of these rules have to do with research and proper citation. Gaining familiarity with these rules, however, is critically important, as unintentional mistakes can lead to 294 charges of plagiarism - the unaccredited use (intentional and unintentional) of

somebody else's words or ideas. You can avoid plagiarism by knowing what must be documented when using information from various sources. As a rule of thumb, always provide references and citations. Specific words and phrases: When using an author's words verbatim, they must be placed in double quotation marks, and due credit must be given to the source. Information and Ideas: Even when paraphrasing or presenting someone else's ideas in your own words, you must document the source of the information. Information: If a piece of information is not common knowledge, you must provide a source, even if it is an unpublished document. Ideas: As a writer, you must acknowledge the source/ author if it provided - points made and conclusions drawn, specific methods or theory, the arrangement of material, or a list of steps in a process or characteristics of a medical condition, etc. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1. Use the space below for your answers
2. Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1) List the different sub-sections of the final section of the research report.

2) What are the different ways of documentation styles?

3) Differentiate between conclusions and recommendations.

17.6 EFFECTIVE WRITING
Several aspects make writing effective. We have identified six features of effective writing. Clear Objective: A clear objective is the most important feature of any writing. The purpose of all the sections and paragraphs in the report must be completely clear.

Analysing and Good Organisation: A well-organised document always presents
Interpreting Data
information in the Order of Importance. All sections should start with the conclusion and then elucidate it with supporting information. Brief and Concise Writing: The reader should never be overwhelmed by information. It is prudent to be clear and concise and avoid unnecessary or peripheral information wherever possible. As a writer, you should carefully use shorter sentences and familiar words. Appropriate Language: You should avoid using too much jargon or technical words and use simple words that readers can easily understand. If you must use a technical term, define it the first time you use it. Relaxed Style: Style is something personal. It's 'how' you express your ideas rather than what you say. Your style should aim to be persuasive and interesting. Correct Spelling, Grammar, and Punctuation: The content's accuracy is paramount. Although a good report may not directly depend on your language capabilities, it does depend on your ideas and ability to persuade others. Therefore, writers are advised to be accurate and to do a spell and grammar check. Numbering: In this Unit, the point numbering system is used. Main sections are numbered 1, 2, 3, etc., with each sub-section given a decimal sub- division. This system of numbering helps readers keep track of where they are within the report. However, this is only one numbering style, and it is unnecessary to use it always. Some documents, like government reports, may number all paragraphs consecutively, and others may completely skip numbering. As a writer, you should follow the technique that best suits your work.
Other Conventions
A writer needs to remember some other rules for presenting a report. The documents should ideally be typed, double-spaced on one side of the paper, and have adequate margins, as an overcrowded page is difficult to read. Remember to correctly number your pages and refer them to the table of contents. Most organisations have their own rules for presenting reports and other documents, and these may vary from others. You should follow the rules laid out by the organisation you work for.
Style, Presentation and Level
Everyone has their writing style, which should show through even when your material must be presented in a conventional format. Convey to your reader your enthusiasm for your investigation without using colloquial phrases ("Branded cumulative experiment on the roof ') or unnecessary scientific jargon ("most interesting investigation into the psychology of a member of the common Indian Diaspora that occurs on the geographic stratification of our local coastal Australian cities"). Write clearly and simply. Try reading it

aloud; if your sentences are so mouthful that you stumble over them, redo them. So, who do you pitch the report to? How much information is necessary? Your friends, parents and a professional environmental scientist may read your report. The best idea is to write it for an intelligent person (for example. a colleague who is also doing communication research) with a general knowledge of the subject like you. You do not need to go into detail, but you do explain new information or unusual methods that you alone know about. Do whatever is necessary to include the readability. Do not hesitate to use the semicolon, short sentences, 15-20 words long, with one idea per sentence. Run-on sentences can be very annoying; it is a poor style to repeat a complex subject, just to be exact. In some cases, putting paragraph indents may also be clearer, especially for separate mathematical formulae or quotations. Use active voice rather than passive voice. Typing a report produces a document that looks good, but typing is not essential. Whatever method you use, there are several things to check (that are more visible on a typed report). It is vitally important you do this. What sounded perfectly reasonable to you at 4 am often does not sound reasonable to anyone else on the planet the next day. By proofreading, you also ensure that you are not making silly mistakes. Below is a checklist you should follow:
1. Typographical and spelling errors in the text
2. Mathematical or typographical errors in tables and graphs
3. Omissions of headings and captions on tables and figures
4. Errors in the references
5. Try reading the work carefully (and slowly) sometime after you have
finished. Writing well is not easy. Even great authors find it difficult. The best way to write is to write, edit, rewrite, edit, and revise several times until the report is clear, concise, and readable. One way to do this is to have someone else read and/or edit your report. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1. Use the space below for your answers
2. Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1) What are the formats of reference styles?

Analysing and 1) What are the elements of editing and rewriting?
Interpreting Data

3) What does 'Style' of writing mean?
Activity: 2 You can download some research reports from the net or access them from the library and analyse the typical report format structures and variations in them.
17.7 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we have taken you through writing a research report simply and sequentially. We discussed that a research report is a presentation of facts and findings, usually as a basis for recommendations, written for a specific readership, and probably intended to be kept as a record. A research report follows a typical format - the beginning, the main body of the report, and the final section. The unit's structure, given at the beginning, can serve as a template for what should be included and how a report should be structured. Writing a report is perhaps one of the most difficult parts of the research process because there is so much material that it is hard to include everything. You are also so deeply involved that you sometimes do not see the errors. Hence, due care needs to be taken while writing a research report. In the final analysis, this report is presented for evaluation by an examiner, for a panel of experts, or even for other researchers to read. With this unit, we have come to the end of the course on Communication Research Methods. The purpose has been to provide you with enough input and knowledge to enable you to undertake systematic research in your area of interest and write the report. Remember, the more research you do, the better you will become and the more you will contribute to generating scholarship in communication research. Practice makes perfect.
17.8 KEYWORDS
APA Format: APA refers to the American Psychological Association format for documentation. Typically, APA style is used for social science, biological science, and nursing research papers. Bibliography Card: A bibliography card contains the information needed when writing the Reference or Works Cited page. Use a different bibliography card for each reference source or keep the information in a file on your computer. Bibliographic Information: The last page of your research paper or

documented essay will list all the sources you used to write your paper. Each source must contain bibliographic information, including author, title, and publication information. Citation: Each entry on the Works Cited or Reference page is called a citation, and it contains the bibliographic information needed for a reader to find the source information. Journal: Journals are periodicals written by and for professionals in specific fields. MLA Format: MLA refers to the Modem Language Association format for documentation. Typically, MLA style is used for language and literature research papers. Paraphrase: One kind of citation to use is the paraphrase. When paraphrasing, you express another person's ideas in your own words. A paraphrase includes all the information from the source, but the wording is your own. All paraphrases must be documented with a parenthetical citation, and the source must be listed on the paper's Works Cited or Reference Page. Parenthetical Citation: Parenthetical citation is used to identify reference information in the paper. A brief notation is placed at the end of the last sentence of each reference. It contains information needed to identify the source. Periodical: Periodicals are publications that are printed at regular intervals, such as journals, magazines, newspapers, and newsletters. Plagiarism occurs when other people's words or ideas are used without crediting the source. Primary Sources: Primary sources are the source of information. They include original writings of an author, autobiographies, speeches, and laboratory experiments. Quotation: A quotation incorporates an author's exact wording in your writing. Quotations should be used sparingly in your paper and must always be cited. Reference Page: The reference page, using the APA format, lists all the sources used in compiling the paper. Each source must be fully documented with complete bibliographic information. Secondary Sources: Secondary sources contain information about the primary source. They include newspapers, periodicals, and journal articles written about a topic. Biographies, critiques, and analyses are also examples of secondary sources. Summary: A summary is one kind of citation used in research papers. It captures the most important ideas from the original source. It is written entirely in your own words and is shorter than the original material. All summaries must be documented with a parenthetical citation, and the source must be listed on the paper's Works Cited or Reference Page.

Analysing and Works Cited Page: The Works Cited page, using the MLA format, shows all
Interpreting Data
the sources used in compiling the paper or report. Each source is fully documented with complete bibliographic information.
17.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Evans, D., Gruba, P., & Zobel, J. (2011). How to write a better thesis.
Melbourne Univ. Publishing.
2. John Bowden, Writing a Report: How to prepare, write and present
effective reports, Publisher: How To Books, 2004
3. Livingston, S. A. (2012). How to write an effective research
report. Research Memorandum ETS RM-12-05search.
4. The Reporting Skills and Professional Writing Handbook, ELD
Publications, 2008
17.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The three key sections of the report are the beginning, the main body,
and the final section.
2. The three subsections explain why it is interesting, what information is
already known on the topic, and what the aims of your study were. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The main body of the report contains many sections. It includes the
survey of the literature, the statement of the problem, the research design, the methodology, the data analysis, the findings, and the conclusion.
2. A literature review summarises what other researchers have researched
and written about the subject.
3. Data can be presented in many ways. Quantitative data are presented in
tables and graphs accompanied by descriptions and explanations. Qualitative data can be organised and presented by theme, with case studies and quotations from respondents. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Summary, conclusions, recommendations, appendix, references.
2. Both are ways in which citations are given in written reports.
3. Conclusions state what the research has found regarding previous theory
or research; recommendations suggest a future course of action. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Formats of reference style are APA, MLA, and Harvard.
2. Clear objectives, good organisation, appropriate academic style, correct
language, and spelling.
3. How an individual writes to convey thoughts to other people.

UNIT 18 ETHICS OF INTERNET RESEARCH
Research Structure
18.0 Introduction
18.1 Learning Outcomes
18.2 Internet Research Issues and Concerns
18.3 Internet as a Research Tool
18.4 History and Development of Internet Research
18.5 Ethical Research Considerations
18.6 Let Us Sum Up
18.7 Further Readings
18.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
18.0 INTRODUCTION
In research, we are familiar with primary and secondary research methods. In the primary research method, we gather data from participants, and in the secondary, data is collected from secondary information sources. Primary and secondary research can be conducted using the Internet in the digital era. Like we use the Internet to access secondary sources of information available from library databases and online journals, we can also use the Internet to recruit participants, administer materials, and collect responses as primary sources of information. Ethical concerns are involved in all activities related to research. Ethical concerns bother Internet research not only as a tool but also as a field. Since the Internet plays an important role in all areas and subareas, i.e. social sciences, arts and humanities, medicine, and biomedicine, from commerce to natural science, Internet ethics has become part of every discipline. Using the Internet to locate secondary resources can have great pedagogical value as we get access to innumerable data published in areas related to our area of interest. When we compare the effort in terms of time and cost regarding reviewing the information available, searching for information on the Internet is quick and cost-effective compared to library-based research. However, though the work towards gathering the information appears simpler in the era of Internet-mediated Research, the challenges that surface while undertaking research using the Internet as a primary source cannot be side- lined.
18.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the basic tenets of Internet research ethics. * Explain the suitable course of action during any ethical dilemma situation. * Undertake Internet related research with the suitable understanding on ethical issues involved in it.

Analysing and 18.2 INTERNET RESEARCH ISSUES AND
Interpreting Data
CONCERNS
Internet-mediated Research has presented many challenges to researchers. If the participating respondents fear the misuse of their private information, the researchers are worried about the credibility of the participants. Since social media platforms provide scope for opening anonymous and fake accounts, the credibility of the participant in research work has doubled the challenges of a researcher. Identifying the participants, making them agree to participate and obtaining informed consent from the participants are additional problems of Internet Research. The easy availability of information through Big Data and the security of the data - Cloud Computing are other research challenges concerning primary data. Easy access to information has also led to plagiarism and copyright violations of the original author. The information downloaded can be slanted and adjusted to avoid legal concerns, Ex, Hacking. Artificial Intelligence support is another concern of IMR. Despite the challenges, undoubtedly, the exponential growth of the Internet has provided a new dimension to research. Today's researchers are exposed to unprecedented opportunities in the area of research. Following ethics is very important for a person interested in taking up research work. Knowledge of ethics becomes more important if the research undertaken is based on the Internet. Knowledge of Research Ethics facilitates a student not only to understand the challenges but also regarding the methods of preparation to overcome the challenges. Research ethics is also now an essential part of the planning and management of big data research projects for the corporate sector. With social networking sites turning into enormous "living laboratories," e.g., dating apps, Instagram, or Facebook becoming a platform for # movements, understanding ethics is becoming important. The challenges leading to Internet research demand strict adherence to ethical guidelines, and researchers who wish to contribute to the knowledge related to their area of interest should adhere to established codes of conduct and ethical frameworks. Staying informed about evolving ethical standards and technological developments will enable the researchers to responsibly address emerging issues and challenges related to the Internet. Research is a very broad term. It is an activity of gathering information to further an understanding of the topic of interest. Some post-collection analysis, such as a concern for quality or synthesis, might be included. Internet research is like any other systematic investigation and gathering of information using online resources. The activity related to research involves exploring websites, databases, and other online platforms to collect not only information but also data, facts, and necessary insights on a particular topic under study. IRE is "the analysis of ethical issues and application of research ethics principles pertaining to research conducted on and on the Internet. Internet- based research, broadly defined, is research that utilises the Internet to collect information through an online tool, such as an online survey; studies about how people use the Internet, e.g., through collecting data and/or examining

activities in or on any online environments; and/or, uses of online datasets, Research databases, or repositories." Internet research can be understood as the systematic process of gathering, analysing, and interpreting information from online sources to acquire knowledge or insights on a specific subject. Using the Internet to complete research makes longitudinal study practically feasible. Here, the researcher can establish connections with numerous people from various places who share an interest in the same subject to obtain and share information. In a simple sense, Internet research is the practice of using the Internet to gather information available on different pages of the World Wide Web. In most cases, the search is to gather information from pages/ sites that are available for free. It is important to know that since Internet research provides immediate and worldwide access to information most of the time for free, the results may be affected by unrecognised bias and difficulties in verifying the source's credentials. Additionally, if the searcher lacks sufficient skill to draw meaningful results from the material available, the challenge of compiling the information will add to the credibility of the research. In addition, the challenges get further complicated if the site, once referred, cannot open again for various reasons, including reconstruction of sites. Thus, it is not advisable to work on the Internet without establishing guidelines to check the reliability of web pages under search. In this pretext, where Internet has developed into a platform and tool for social communication and has turned present-day activities into data-driven from human-centred activity; in this digital era, there has been ongoing discussion over the development of the Internet as to whether new ethical conundrums are arising or whether those that already exist are comparable to those found in more conventional research methodologies. Since Internet- based research involves ethical issues that include challenges like participant knowledge and consent, data privacy, security, anonymity and confidentiality, the integrity of data, issues related to intellectual property, and norms of community and professionals, it is important to understand the ethics that need to be followed while conducting Internet-based research. Personal identifiability, reputational risk and harm, ideas of public space and public text, ownership, and data longevity are some ethical and methodologically complex issues surrounding Internet research. Additional ethical concerns are related to issues of anonymity and confidentiality of data and challenges related to data integrity, as research projects can be outsourced or crowdsourced to online labour marketplaces. For a researcher, it is important to remember that with technological advancements, data is processed, stored, and disseminated via cloud computing or in remote server locales, adding to legal complexities. Further, the dominance of big data, which has enabled tools for Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for researchers, has its complexities. Advances in technology have raised many more obligations. Since research activities include interventions in "Public" Internet spaces in terms of surveillance and data tracking, confidentiality or anonymity of the source, methods of obtaining informed consent, methods of researching minors 303

Analysing and (children), chances of deception, and withholding identifiable information are
Interpreting Data
some of the common challenges faced by researchers.
18.3 INTERNET AS A TOOL OF RESEARCH
Research activity on the Internet begins like any traditional research method. In the pre-Internet era of research, after spending countless hours in the library's reference section, combing through card catalogues, a researcher would identify the journals and indexes of books to be referred to. Going by the publication standard, the sources' reliability was judged, and the bibliography was prepared, listing all the information sources. Contrary to this time-consuming process, the Internet facility in the university or organisation provides access to thousands of major library catalogues in addition to their own in no time. The facility allows the researcher to search the data by subject, author, or title. A working bibliography can be compiled with software in a lot less time. There is also a searchable online database on the Internet that offers access to thousands of journals and tables of contents. With the prevailing facilities, if the researcher is educated about methods of using the Internet and tools of searching and identifying authenticated reliable sources, then research work in the present day can be undertaken without wasting much time. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Define Internet Research Ethics.

2. What are the issues and concerns of Internet Research?

18.4 HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF IRE
The emphasis on adding ethical dimensions to Internet research has developed due to the extensive dependence on the Internet for research purposes. In the mid-1990s, there was a surge in Internet research and a clear focus on ethical issues simultaneously. It was a time when the Internet was used for email, messages, and chats. The specifics of the ethical issues involved are unclear when the field of study is young, but as it develops, data are gathered. As the usage of the Internet moved from the human element to their presence in virtual space, the 'field' of study changed the dynamics of researchers and research.

The reasons for this can be attributed to the persistent change in technology Research in the field of information and communication; secondly, the Internet completely transforms how information is gathered, accessed, and shared across all domains. Today, graphical user interfaces allow global access to factual and bibliographic databases. It is important to note that not only is information available in abundance, but the facility of having an interactive source has made the Internet a popular source of educational applications. Thirdly, the provision of interaction has facilitated the formation of a " Network Society" where a researcher connects with another beyond geographical boundaries. Internet research ethics are conceptualised differently depending on the discipline, even though many researchers have stuck to the conventional research ethics guidelines. Certain academic fields, particularly those in the humanities and arts, assert that research conducted on the Internet focuses more on context and representation than on "human subjects," implying that researching real people has no purpose and, therefore, causes little to no harm. However, ethical issues were raised when data was gathered online. Especially when it comes to using recorded interviews to gather historical significance, personal commentary, and recollections; these were gathered during personal interactions and transcribed later. However, if such documents are available online, then the confidentiality of the source is violated, particularly in the case of medical history. In response to the argument made by the American Historical Association (A. Jones, 2008) that research of this kind should be "explicitly exempted" from ethical review board oversight, the use of the Internet could make this position more difficult to maintain if the data were to become publicly available or "downstream," where there could be unanticipated risks to one's reputation, financial standing, or psychological well-being should identification occur. The same was discussed about blogger content; generally speaking, text from blogs is regarded as publicly available, published material, so a researcher does not need permission to use it. A substantial body of scholarly literature detailing IRE across disciplines and methodologies had emerged by the mid-2000s, thanks to the publication of three significant anthologies and an expanding body of literature. As a result, anecdotal evidence began to surface from the review boards assessing this research. To gather empirical information about the actual review board procedures of Internet research from the standpoint of human subjects, Buchanan and Ess polled over 700 ethics review boards in the United States. They discovered that the boards' main concerns were privacy, data security and confidentiality, and ensuring appropriate informed consent and recruitment procedures (Buchanan & Ess, 2009; Buchanan & Hvizdak,
2009) . Post 2008, many organisations across the disciplines have
predominantly included IRE as part of the research theme. Researchers from fields not typically associated with studying human subjects have started investigating IRE independently. For instance, computer security researchers have actively investigated the principles of research ethics in CS and ICT.

Analysing and 18.5 ETHICAL RESEARCH CONSIDERATIONS
Interpreting Data
Ethics in research involve principles of integrity, transparency, and respect for the participants. Researchers should ensure informed consent, minimise harm, and maintain confidentiality. Ethical boards should be established in institutions to ensure studies meet the desired standard of research. Research ethics offers standards for the ethical and responsible conduct of research. In addition, the set of guidelines educates and monitors scientists' research to ensure a high ethical standard. The same can be applied to Ethics for Internet-based Research. Some of the common ethical elements that are applied are: Principles of Integrity: Principles of integrity include honesty, accuracy, and reliability. Honesty is desired while collecting data, analysing results, determining appropriate methods and procedures, and determining publication status. Researchers should attempt to be truthful with their data and not fabricate, falsify, or misrepresent it. It is equally important to disclose any conflict of interest. Integrity in research not only builds trust but also increases credibility within the scientific community. Objectivity: Aim to prevent bias in the design of the experiment, data analysis, interpretation, peer review, hiring decisions, and conclusion. Carefulness: This is an essential part of good research. carefully and critically examine for plagiarism while presenting the data. Transparency: Publication and presentation of the obtained data are essential parts of research. Openly sharing methods, data, and results fosters reproducibility. Transparency also allows scrutiny and promotes trust, helping to establish the credibility and reliability of scientific findings. Respect for Intellectual Property: Honour for patents and copyrights, as well as intellectual property in the form of diagrams, figures, etc. The prime responsibility of the researcher is to attribute. Confidentiality: Protecting the confidential details of the respondents is very essential. More care should be given to protect the personnel records of the respondents. Care should also be given to protect any other details that the respondent wishes to protect, or that should be protected legally. The researchers need to prioritise the protection of the privacy of individuals who are involved in the studies. Safeguarding the rights by respecting privacy is as important as obtaining informed consent from the participant. Responsible Publication: Publication of the research is an important aspect of research. When submitting the research paper for publication, care should be taken that the same research paper is not submitted to another journal without withdrawing from the first. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.

1. Write briefly about the arrival of Internet-based Research.
Research

2. List the Ethical Considerations in Research.

18.5.1 Challenges of Internet Research
In this technology-driven era, we will probably have discovered new technology by the time we finish reading, leading to a new set of thoughts on ethics. Some of the ethical concerns that bother the Internet Research Ethics are: Privacy - a major concern: Privacy is crucial to Internet research ethics. Researchers delve into online spaces and often encounter vast amounts of personal information. A researcher needs to respect individuals' privacy rights and safeguard the confidentiality of participants with utmost care. Principles of ethics stress that the primary role of the investigator is to safeguard the privacy and confidentiality of the source. The degree of disclosure of private or sensitive information may bring an embarrassing situation to the respondent, and being high in Internet-mediated research, care must be considered. Ethical rules of research suggest that the investigators should take sufficient measures to safeguard the information gathered. Disclosure of information may include data that may be legally protected. Social Media Platforms are considered an abundant source of information for researchers. For example, posts on Facebook and Instagram by its account holders can be accessed by the public, thus bringing a challenge to privacy. Since the posts made by the account holders are accessible to the public, the published content on these platforms by the account holders does not fit into the legal purview of "private information". However, a researcher gathering information related to the topic of his/her interest instead of casually taking the content as granted obtains permission to use the published material, the research data receives authenticity. Recruitment of Participants: In any research, sampling techniques are used to identify the participants from the study population. The selection of the sample should be based on impartial and objective rules. Applying the same rules while drawing samples in Internet research, the researcher should select respondents methodically and not those whose information is easily accessible. It is always advisable to crosscheck for the authenticity of the account holder to rule out the chances of including fake accounts in the study.

Analysing and It is important to remember that the selected participants could be
Interpreting Data
pseudonyms online or have multiple or alternative identities. The researcher should be careful with fact-checking. After verifying a subject's age and demographic information, only suitable respondents should be included in the study. While conducting research using the Internet, recruitment takes place, including push technologies, sending a message using text format, ex, message, tweet, and direct mail. In terms of ethics, the researcher needs to disclose the method of recruiting the participant. The research adds value if the researcher seeks permission from the website owners and group moderators before posting recruitment announcements, along with the permission of the moderators and the opening and closing date for receiving details. In the end, when recruiting participants online, researchers must ensure that those interested receive information from the recruitment materials and any forms. Researchers also need to ensure that hiring practices don't result in someone being identified without that person's consent. Gathering Informed Consent: Given the diverse and dynamic nature of online environments, obtaining explicit consent from participants is challenging. To minimise this challenge, researchers must transparently communicate the purpose of their study, the data collected, and how it will be used. The researchers should also provide participants with the autonomy to opt in or out of the study. Fostering a sense of trust between researchers and the online community will enhance the quality of research. The consent of a participant in the research process is largely gathered in writing format. Informed consent indicates that participants are voluntarily participating in the research with their knowledge of relevant risks and benefits. Here, the researcher explains the purpose and details of the research. The researcher also provides sufficient time for the recipient to clearly understand and inquire about the research process. The participant provides consent by signing in a printed format, by mail, voice recording, and video recording. In Internet-based research, the researcher may create a portal or site to complete the consent form. The participant can read the documentation and click on an "I agree" for submission; the data will also be password protected. The researchers can also use electronic signatures to obtain consent. In the case of research related to minors, parental consent is obtained. Conducting research related to minors indeed is a challenge in the case of online research. In addition to obtaining the consent letter, conducting demographic verifications related to the minor is a challenge. Obtaining required data from the minor without parental influence is another concern. Data security in Cloud Computing: Internet users are becoming familiar with cloud computing, which enables data storage, networking, etc., since maintaining physical data can be time-consuming. Cloud computing allows researchers to access resources when a cloud service provider requires them. The special features of cloud computing include providing data on demand

and quickly, easy networking, and pooling of resources, which has made it Research popular. For researchers, gathering information is easy and cost-effective due to its features. Data is gathered from different online platforms like Google Docs or Microsoft Office 365, as well as online file storage and sharing services like Dropbox or Box.net. Data is also pulled from social media platforms like Facebook Developers Platform. Cloud computing services are accessed by researchers in all activities related to research, ranging from finding a suitable topic to research and data collection to processing and analysing data. This conjecture presents the ethical implications regarding data security with special reference to security. The researchers need to be careful regarding the data that contains sensitive or personal information that is not accessible to others. It is imperative to ensure that the users providing labour through crowdsourcing cannot store copies of the research dataset. Acknowledging the contributors is a challenge among the other challenges involved in crowdsourcing. Particularly if they are anonymous, research must accurately and fairly describe authorship to be ethical. The primary concern of the digital age is data security. Employing encryption, secure servers, and adhering to established data protection standards are imperative to maintain the integrity of Internet research. Since the vast repositories of information are available on the Internet, it is important to prevent unauthorised usage of potential data. In addition to data privacy, data stewardship appears to be a big challenge. Stewardship is responsible for the management of data or cloud services. The demand is for the proper use of data, its security, optimisation, and compliance with the data. The primary objective is to minimise the risk and maximise the benefits. Stewardship demands arriving at proper governance before cloud computing. The researchers, particularly those who share datasheets on 'cloud' with their partners working from different geographical locations nationally or internationally for their collaborative project, face data privacy challenges in "cloud computing". The researchers who take up research projects should arrive at policies and procedures beforehand. The situation becomes more complex if the cloud provider has spread the data across several locations. The team should identify and assess the risks that surface. The best method to protect shared data is to encrypt the same. Crowdsourcing is another area that raises ethical questions for researchers. It is the practice of obtaining desired services or content from a large group of people via the Internet. Crowdsourcing can assist researchers in all aspects of research in generating the desired results at a lower cost than traditional methods. Researchers need to develop new procedures to safeguard their data by combating the challenges of labour management and authorship. Potential Impact on Participants: The research work undertaken may sometimes impact participants in one way or another. For example, research work on an online community. Care should be taken while disseminating information that may directly or indirectly harm a community. It is the responsibility of the researcher to minimise or nullify the harm to any community or participants.

Analysing and Challenges posed by Big Data: 'Big data-based research, which emerged in
Interpreting Data
2012, has been growing among researchers. In the context of big data research, privacy's definition and nature have become muddied, making it difficult to ensure privacy is respected and protected in this new field. Big data research has led to algorithmic processing; from "algorithmic harms" to "predictive analytics," the power of modern algorithms surpasses long- standing privacy norms and beliefs. Hence, big data-based research can face ethical complications. For instance, it becomes challenging to determine what qualifies as "private information" in the context of big data research, raising specific privacy concerns. For example, when users of social media platforms take no visible steps to restrict access, big data researchers may conclude that respondents are not particular about privacy. Here, users frequently don't realise that their social media activity can be routinely tracked, collected, and shared with outside parties. The privacy policies are not fully understood by the members. It is also difficult to decode the user's intention when sharing the information on a social media platform. These uncertainties can also lead to conceptual muddles when a researcher attempts to reach conclusions. Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence also add to the ethical concerns of Internet research. For example, Deep fake videos and dating apps. In such and other similar cases, ethical concerns have been raised about the very purpose of creating algorithms. A video or photo published in the public domain is invariably 'public' and will be accessed by people without consent. The challenges of technology-driven digital media have already led to concerns about AI ethics. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Privacy is a major concern of ethics in Internet research. Justify

2. "Negligence of Social Media Subscribers has posed ethical challenges to
a researcher". Justify your answer.

3. True or False
i. Online participants can be pseudonyms. (T/F) ii. Social Networking Sites have made it difficult to handle privacy in Internet research. (T/F) iii. Since the data is freely available a researcher need not gather informed consent in Internet Research. (T/F)

iv. The best way to gather informed consent from a participant is to Research create a feedback portal. (T/F) v. Crowdsourcing does not involve ethical challenges of labour management and authorship. (T/F)
18.6 LET US SUM UP
In conclusion, the ethics of Internet research demand careful consideration and adherence to principles that safeguard participants' rights and well-being. Privacy, informed consent, data security, and mitigating potential harm should be at the forefront of researchers' minds as they navigate online research's expensive and complex world. Upholding these ethical standards ensures the credibility of research and promotes the responsible and constructive use of the Internet as a powerful tool for advancing knowledge. We use the Internet extensively in research by visiting various sites for information. We also consider the usage or dependence of Internet human subjects as a topic for research, such as the gratification of social media and behavioural research. For undertaking research, we gather data using various techniques (such as data collection, mining, profiling, scraping, recording, monitoring, or observing already-existing data sets, chat room exchanges, blogs, social media posts, etc.). Search engines, data aggregators, digital archives, application programming interfaces (APIs), online survey platforms, and crowdsourcing platforms are some of the tools that make Internet research possible. Online research venues include online research venues for online research, online research venues for online multiplayer games, blogs, interactive websites, social networking platforms, instant messaging and discussion forums, and other conversation platforms. Researchers looking to examine the dynamics of human interactions and their effects in this virtual medium find the Internet a prime target due to the abundance of social and behavioural data that can be found there. It may be possible for researchers to gather data from widely separated populations faster and at a lower cost than they could if they were to make comparable efforts in the real world. The number of Internet studies, ranging from surveys to naturalistic observation, has increased. This tendency also indicates that the desired information can be gathered without direct interaction with human subjects. Research works, either industry-based or academic, in the era when almost every individual has their presence on one or another social media platform, also provide the threat of intrusion into someone else's privacy. The provision to process personal data available in the public domain due to ignorance or negligence of people who have the habit of sharing every minute detail of their lives may benefit some new acting talents, new creations, hobbies, etc. However, a majority of the public may feel surprised, outraged, or even harmed due to the intrusion of some stranger into their private life, such as deep fake videos/morphed photographs, etc. In all such instances, from the researcher's point of view, the account holder could be anonymous or hold a fake account, and content may lead to plagiarism challenges. To bring authenticity and credibility to the research work

Analysing and undertaken, following, and practising the ethics of Internet Research is
Interpreting Data
essential.
18.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Buchanan, E. A., & Zimmer, M. (2012). Internet research ethics.
https://plato.stanford.edu/ENTRIES/ethics-internet-research/
2. Convery, I., & Cox, D. (2012). A review of research ethics in Internet-
based research. Practitioner Research in Higher Education, 6(1), 50-57. https://insight.cumbria.ac.uk/id/eprint/1334/2/100-467-1-PB.pdf
3. Cilliers, L., & Viljoen, K. (2021). A framework of ethical issues to
consider when conducting Internet-based research. South African Journal of Information Management, 23(1), 1-9.4. Ess, C. (2007). Internet research ethics. The Oxford handbook of Internet
psychology, 487-502.5. Ess, C. M. (2020). Internet research ethics and social media. Handbook
of research ethics and scientific integrity, 283-303.6. Hanganu, B., Manoilescu, I. S., & Ioan, B. G. (2021). Ethical challenges
in online research. Journal of Intercultural Management and Ethics, 4(3), 17-24. https://jime.csesm.org/index.php/JIME/article/download/192/155
7. Tiidenberg, K. (2020). Research ethics, vulnerability, and trust on the
Internet. Second international handbook of Internet research, 569-583.18.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Internet Research Ethics encompass principles and guidelines governing
the conduct of research involving online data. It includes respecting privacy, obtaining informed consent, ensuring data accuracy, and avoiding harm to participants. Transparency in methods, protection of vulnerable populations, and acknowledgment of sources are integral. Adhering to ethical standards upholds integrity and trust in research outcomes.
2. Issues and concerns in Internet Research span privacy breaches, data
security, and consent challenges. Ethical dilemmas arise regarding anonymity, data ownership, and the use of public versus private information. Digital divides, bias in algorithms, and the impact on marginalized communities raise ethical questions. Balancing research goals with ethical obligations amidst rapidly evolving technologies poses ongoing challenges for researchers. Addressing these concerns fosters responsible and impactful internet research. Check Your progress: 2
1. The advent of Internet-based research revolutionized scholarly inquiry,
facilitating unprecedented access to vast data repositories, and enabling 312 global collaboration. Researchers leverage online platforms for surveys,

data collection, and analysis, enhancing efficiency and scope. However, Research challenges such as data security, validity, and representativeness require meticulous consideration to ensure robust findings. Additionally, navigating issues of digital ethics, including consent, privacy, and data ownership, is imperative to uphold research integrity and protect participants' rights.
2. Ethical considerations are paramount in research endeavours, guiding
ethical conduct and safeguarding the welfare of participants. Key considerations include obtaining informed consent, ensuring confidentiality and anonymity, and minimizing harm or distress. Researchers must also uphold integrity in data collection, analysis, and reporting, avoiding plagiarism, falsification, or manipulation. Furthermore, equitable treatment of participants, respect for cultural diversity, and adherence to professional standards are essential ethical principles. Upholding these considerations fosters trust, credibility, and ethical integrity in research practice, contributing to the advancement of knowledge and societal well-being. Check Your progress. III
1. Privacy is paramount in Internet research due to the potential for data
exploitation and breaches. Individuals share vast amounts of personal information online, often unaware of the consequences. Research involving this data must uphold ethical standards to protect participants from harm, ensure informed consent, and maintain confidentiality. Failure to prioritize privacy can lead to breaches of trust, legal ramifications, and damage to individuals' reputation and well-being. Therefore, ethical considerations regarding privacy are crucial to safeguarding the rights and dignity of internet users, maintaining research integrity, and fostering trust between researchers and participants.
2. The negligence of social media subscribers introduces ethical dilemmas
for researchers. Social media platforms are repositories of personal information, often shared willingly but sometimes without full awareness of the implications. Researchers must navigate complex ethical terrain when accessing and analysing this data, ensuring respect for user privacy, consent, and confidentiality. Neglecting these considerations can result in ethical breaches, such as unauthorized data use, exploitation, or harm to participants. Consequently, researchers face the challenge of balancing the potential insights from social media data with their responsibility to uphold ethical standards and safeguard the rights and well-being of subscribers.
3. True or False
i. True, ii. True, iii. False, iv. True, v. False


======================================================================
=== SOURCE: MNM-032E.pdf ===
======================================================================

MNM-032
ICT for Development
Indira Gandhi National Open University
School of Journalism and New Media Studies
BLOCK 1
ICT: Conceptual Framework 7
BLOCK 2
ICT For Development 69
BLOCK 3
ICT: Approaches and Applications 135
BLOCK 4
Future of ICT4D 187

Disclaimer: Any materials and images adapted from web-based resources in this self-learning course material are being used for educational purposes only and not for commercial purposes.
PROGRAMME COORDINATOR: Prof. K.S. Arul Selvan
BLOCK 1
Unit 1 Adopted from SOEDS, IGNOU Unit Dr. Geetika Vashishata,
8 Adjunct Faculty, Manipal Institute of
Communication, Manipal Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal,
Karnataka
Unit 2 Dr. Chhavi Garg, Unit Dr. Anusuah Rajendran
Assistant Professor, Department 13 Assistant Professor,
of Mass Communication and Department of Visual Communication,
Media Studies, Central University Mother Teresa Women's University,
of Punjab, Bathinda, Punjab Kodaikanal, Tamil Nadu
Unit 3 Prof. K S Arul Selvan, SOJNMS, Unit Dr. Anupa Lahkar,
IGNOU 14 Post Doctoral fellow,
Madhumita Das, SOJNMS, ICSSR New Delhi
IGNOU
Unit 6 Dr. Chirasrota Jena,
Visiting Faculty, Department of
Journalism & Mass
Communication, Ravenshaw
University, Cuttack, Odisha
Unit 9, Adopted from MADJ of SOJNMS, Unit Adopted from E-PG Pathshala, Ministry
10, 11 IGNOU 3, 5, of Education, Govt of India & 12 7 &
PRODUCTION TEAM
Mr. Sanjay Agarwal
Asst. Registrar
MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi
May, 2024 (c) Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2024
ISBN:
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. Further information on the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University's office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi. Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi. Laser Typeset by Tessa Media & Computers, C-206, A.F.E.-II, Okhla, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
BLOCK 1 ICT: CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 7
UNIT 1 ICT for Development - An Overview 9
UNIT 2 Implementation of ICT4D 28
UNIT 3 ICT and Digital Divide 42
UNIT 4 Issues of Digital Inequality 52
BLOCK 2 ICT FOR DEVELOPMENT 69
UNIT 5 ICT for Poverty Reduction 71
UNIT 6 ICT for Economic Development 81
UNIT 7 ICT for Rural Development 98
UNIT 8 ICT for Environment Sustainability 109
BLOCK 3 ICT: APPROACHES AND 135
APPLICATIONS
UNIT 9 ICT for Open Learning 137
UNIT 10 ICT for Disability 159
UNIT 11 ICT for Agriculture 175
BLOCK 4 FUTURE OF ICT4D 187
UNIT 12 Characteristics of Knowledge Society 189
UNIT 13 Knowledge Society - Development Countries 216
Perspectives
UNIT 14 E-Governance: Policy and Framework 229

COURSE MNM032 INTRODUCTION: ICT FOR
DEVELOPMENT
The massive Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure established over the decades by many stakeholders provides immense support to developmental activities. This process becomes more crucial in developing countries, where there is a challenge of leveraging the ICT potential in the last-mile connectivity issues. However, mobile technology has a dominant reach, and many services are being moved towards online/digital platforms; it is pertinent to trace and understand the role of communication technologies in our daily lives within the context of developments. This course will cover various topics associated with ICT for Development; in short, it is being identified as ICT4D. Block 1 - ICT: Conceptual Frameworks. Block 1 of our Information and Communication Technology (ICT) course deals with the context of development. In this Block, we explore and understand the conceptual framework of ICT and its implications for societal progress. Unit 1 lays the groundwork by introducing ICT for Development, emphasising its pivotal role in today's interconnected world. We will discuss its attributes, explore its interface with development, and examine the strategies driving e- development. Unit 2 explains the implementation of ICT4D, tracing its historical evolution and key components. Through case studies, we will discuss the successful ICT4D projects while dissecting challenges such as the digital divide and ethical considerations like privacy and inclusivity. Unit 3 shifts our focus to the profound impact of ICT on societal development and the disparities it creates, exploring the Digital Divide and its various dimensions. You will comprehend the nexus between the Digital Divide and Development and recognise the shaping influence of social media on access.
Unit 4, we will discuss the multifaceted landscape of digital inequality,
analysing its conceptual development, dimensions, and impact on contemporary society. Through sociological and technological lenses, we will explore various theoretical frameworks and gain insights into this pressing social problem. Block 2 - ICT for Development. Throughout this Block, we will explore the role of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) in fostering global progress across various sectors. In Unit 5, we will explore how ICTs intersect with poverty reduction efforts, analysing their effectiveness and exploring avenues for equitable development, especially in rural areas. Unit 6, we will discuss the intricate connections between ICTs and economic development. From foundational concepts to real-world case studies, we will examine how digital technologies drive economic growth, productivity, and innovation, shaping global economic landscapes. In Unit 7, our focus shifts to rural development as we uncover the transformative potential of ICTs in rural areas. By infusing technology into these landscapes, we aim to bridge existing gaps, catalyse development, and propel progress. Unit 8, we will explore the crucial nexus between ICT and environmental sustainability. From green ICT initiatives to smart cities and e-waste management, we will

discuss how integrating ICT can pave the way for a greener, more sustainable future for all. Block 3 - ICT: Approaches and Application. Throughout this Block, we will understand the multifaceted world of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and its diverse applications across various domains. In
Unit 9, we explore the dynamic realm of ICTs in open learning systems.
From traditional classrooms to open and distance learning (ODL), ICTs are pivotal in shaping modern learning environments. We will examine current practices and envision prospects in this ever-evolving field. Unit 10 explores the transformative potential of ICT for disability, highlighting its role in fostering inclusivity and empowerment. From assistive devices to universal accessibility, we unravel the terminologies and historical evolution shaping this dynamic field, exploring its present and future landscapes. In Unit 11, we investigate the critical role of ICT in agriculture, addressing farmers' increasing demand for timely and accurate information amidst market liberalisation and globalisation. Block 4 - Future of ICT4D. In this Block, we explore the dynamic
landscape of Information and Communication Technologies for Development
(ICT4D) and its implications for the future. Unit 12 sets the stage by exploring the characteristics of an Information/Knowledge Society. Here, we will understand the essence of information and its evolution into a knowledge-based society. You'll gain insights into how information systems shape our modern world. From understanding the information transfer chain to exploring the emergence of information and knowledge societies, this Unit provides a comprehensive view of our interconnected digital age. Unit 13 looks at the Knowledge Society from a Developing country perspective. Also, this Unit examines its role in driving societal evolution. You'll gain a nuanced understanding of the complex interplay between technology, economics, and development. In Unit 14, we explore E-Governance Policy and Framework. Unravelling the intricacies of e-governance, we explore its significance and understand concepts like Information Technology and Information System Management. Through in-depth discussions on various models, projects, and partnerships, you'll gain insights into the complexities and potentials of e-governance in our modern world. Throughout the course, you will understand the challenges and opportunities of ICT for Development in diverse contexts from the perspectives of developing countries. This course will give you a broader understanding of the role of technology in improving human living standards.

Block
ICT: CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
UNIT 1
ICT for Development - An Overview
UNIT 2
Implementation of ICT4D
UNIT 3
ICT and Digital Divide
UNIT 4
Issues of Digital Inequality

BLOCK 1 INTRODUCTION: ICT: CONCEPTUAL
FRAMEWORK
In this Block, you will learn two fundamental components. The first is the potential of ICT to increase the speed of developmental work, and the second is the challenges of implementing technology-based developmental support systems. The conceptual framework of ICT and digital inequality are the focus areas of this Block, and they are being discussed in four Units.
Unit 1 - Introduction to ICT for Development - In today's interconnected
world, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) plays a pivotal role in shaping societal progress. This Unit explains the essential concepts surrounding ICT and its profound impact on development. From understanding ICT's attributes to exploring its interface with development, we will explore the strategies driving e-development. The Unit provides you with scrutiny into the transformative power of ICT in fostering progress and inclusivity.
Unit 2 - Implementation of ICT4D - We Will explore the pivotal role of
Information and Communication Technology for Development (ICT4D), its historical evolution, and key components like digital infrastructure and human capacity. Through case studies, we will witness successful ICT4D projects while dissecting challenges like the digital divide and cultural factors. We will also scrutinise ethical considerations, including privacy and inclusivity.
Unit 3 - ICT and Digital Divide - In this Unit, we will explore the profound
impact of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) on societal development and the disparities it creates. We will discuss the Introduction of the Digital Divide, highlighting its evolution from mere telephone access to the contemporary gap in Internet accessibility. The divide manifests across various dimensions: rural-urban, rich-poor, and literate-illiterate. By the end of this Unit, you will comprehend the Digital Divide and Development nexus, grasp the nuances of Internet penetration in India, and recognise how social media shapes access.
Unit 4 - Issues of Digital Inequality - This Unit will explore the
multifaceted landscape of digital inequality, a pressing social problem in today's interconnected world. We will explore the conceptual development of digital inequality, its dimensions, and its impact on contemporary society. Through sociological and technological lenses, we will analyse theoretical frameworks and approaches to understanding this complex issue. By the end of this Unit, you will gain insights into the various dimensions and perspectives of digital inequality. We hope that the understanding from this Block will help you contextualise the scenarios of ICT-based initiatives in your living environments.

UNIT 1 ICT FOR DEVELOPMENT: AN ICT For Development:
An Overview
OVERVIEW
Structure
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 ICT: Meaning and Attributes
1.4 ICT and Development Interface
1.5 ICT and Sectoral Development
1.6 E-Development and its Strategies
1.7 Let Us Sum Up
1.8 Further Readings
1.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)'s growth and significance in the contemporary scenario signifies the importance and interrelationship between technology, society, and progress. In this Unit, we will understand the various dimensions of ICT characteristics and their role in various sectors. More importantly, you will understand the role of ICT in social, economic, and developmental challenges. The ICT platform leverages the benefits through which individuals, communities, and nations empower for better human living environments. It is a fact that developed nations use Information and Communication Technology (ICT) more than developing countries. In this unit, you will read about the role of ICT in development.
1.2 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Define the meaning and explain attributes of ICT; * Explain the ICT and development interface; * Narrate the role of ICT in the development of various sectors; and * Comprehend e-Development strategies.
1.3 ICT: MEANING AND ATTRIBUTES
1.3.1 Meaning of ICT
Customarily, ICT refers to information, communication, and technology. Generally, we seek information and communicate it to others who may also be interested in its value through technology. Technology is essential in the effective transaction and communication of knowledge or information to its

ICT: Conceptual seekers. ICTs include hardware, processes, and systems that store and Framework manage communications and share information. These tools can be either manual or computerised. ICT is defined by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as "ICTs are information handling tools, a varied set of goods, applications and services that are used to produce, store, process, distribute and exchange information. They include the 'old' ICTs of radio, television and telephone and the 'new' ICTs of computers, satellite and wireless technology and the Internet. These different tools are now able to work together and combine to form our 'networked world' - a massive infrastructure of interconnected telephone services, standardised computing hardware, the Internet, radio, and television, which reaches into every corner of the globe". The ICT has enabled ICT using nations to become an Information Economy. The UNDP document defines Information Economy as "a new global electronic structure where the production of information goods and services dominates wealth and job creation and is underpinned by the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) and the global infrastructure". The OECD member countries define the ICT sector as a combination of manufacturing and services industries that capture, transmit and display data and information electronically. Some commonly used ICT tools are described: i) Mobile phones: These are electronic, portable, and wireless communication devices that are available in different shapes, sizes, and models. Mobile phones connect to a wireless communication network through radio waves or satellite transmissions. According to the business dictionary, "Mobile Phone is a portable device that does not require the use of landlines. It utilises frequencies transmitted by cellular towers to connect the calls between two devices". Mobile phones can communicate via voice calls, emails, text messages, video, picture messages, Bluetooth, infrared and fax. ii) Video Conferencing: According to the BSNL, video conferencing services allow multiple participants to converse with each other regardless of their location through the video endpoints. It enables new ways of communication and collaboration between people at almost any global location. It involves the transmission of visuals and sounds to two or more separate locations through cameras, monitors, speakers, and microphones. Multiple video conferencing enables three or more individuals to sit in a virtual conference room and communicate as if they were sitting beside each other. iii) Radio: Radio is the wireless transmission through the space of electromagnetic waves in the approximate frequency range from 10 kilohertz to 300,000 megahertz. It is a user-friendly and cost-effective technology and an effective communication and knowledge-sharing tool. iv) Internet: The Internet is a global network and IT revolution that connects millions of computers. The Internet has become a public, cooperative, and self-sustaining facility available and accessible to millions of people, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), offices, civil society organisations, private corporate sectors, and more. The

Internet carries a vast array of information resources and services, most ICT For Development:
An Overview
notably the interlinked hypertext documents of the World Wide Web (WWW) and the infrastructure to support electronic mail (email), in addition to popular services such as video on demand, online shopping, online gaming, exchange of information from one-to-many or many-to- many by online chat, online social networking, online publishing, file transfer, file sharing and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) or teleconferencing, telepresence, person-to-person communication via voice and video. v) Television is a widely used telecommunication medium for transmitting and receiving static and moving images, usually accompanied by sound. Televisions are available in different sizes and colours and black-and- white sets. Cable television and remote control are in recent use. ICT has established an inherent relationship between information, communication, and technology. This synergistic relationship is described in Fig. 1.1. Fig. 1.1: Synergistic Relationship between Information, Communication and Technology
1.3.2 Attributes of ICT
After learning the meaning of ICT, it is essential to know its attributes. Some of the critical characteristics of ICT are: i) Knowledge Revolution: ICT has the dramatic power to organise information. This has also accelerated the pace of learning, innovation, and knowledge creation and dissemination. It has significantly helped knowledge power. The transfer of knowledge has been faster after the advent of ICT. ICT and the growth of knowledge society have become almost synonymous. ii) Productivity Revolution: The ICT has impacted the ICT using industries and services in raising overall productivity. The economically advanced country of the USA, which has effectively used ICT to enhance productivity across various sectors of the economy, is one of the illustrious examples. In India, sectors using ICT effectively can also raise productivity much faster than their counterparts. ICT in most service sectors has reduced costs and enhanced productivity and output. iii) Learning Revolution: According to the World Bank, ICT has created a 11

ICT: Conceptual learning revolution that has given rise to lifelong learning. According to Framework Resnick, ICT empowers students to become more active and independent learners. ICT has made people less dependent on classroom teaching. iv) Promoting Connections: ICT has promoted connections among people, NGOs, enterprises, and communities. ICT gives rise to empowerment, participation, coordination, decentralisation, social learning, connecting communities of practice, mobilising social capital, and the globalisation of civil society concerns. ICTs have been increasingly described as technologies of freedom. ICT empowers people to connect, mobilise, organise, overcome isolation, and share their experiences and distinctive information. v) Innovation-Driven Economy: ICT is an enabler in transforming the nation from an investment-driven economy to an innovation-driven economy, which is more efficient and productive. ICT has fastened the innovation process in scientific societies. vi) Globalisation booster: ICTs have been a key engine for the performance and growth of economies since the early 1970s, becoming, of course, the main technological enabler of economic globalisation. Global information has become easily accessible through ICT. It is one of the essential energisers of globalisation and has made the world a global village. vii) Promoter of Human Development: The United Nations has long recognised the need for timely and relevant information as a fundamental element of human development. It has emphasised universal access to information and communication services as a basic need. The digital divide affects human development. viii) Contribution to Research and Development: ICT has contributed significantly to research and development. Research guides and scholars use ICTs to acquire information and knowledge. Various sectors and institutions' research and development activities have benefited immensely from the ICT revolution. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: a) Use the spaces given below for your answers. b) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. What do you mean by ICT?

2. How is the Internet helpful in carrying vast information resources and
services?

1.4 ICT AND DEVELOPMENT INTERFACE ICT For Development:
An Overview
Since the early 1970s, the pace of ICT has been recognised as a critical engine for enhancing development and accelerating the growth of economies. ICTs have the potential to not only improve the delivery system of government services but also enhance development outcomes through greater transparency, ease of access, people's participation, and cost reduction. While encouraging the role of ICT in development, Kofi Anan, the former Director General of UNO, said, "A technological revolution is profoundly transforming society. If harnessed and directed properly, ICTs can improve all aspects of our social, economic, and cultural life. ICTs can serve as an engine for development in the 21st century". The UN has recognised the need for timely and relevant information as a fundamental element of human development and has called for universal access to information and communication services as a primary development need. While delineating the role of ICT, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has emphasised that "ICT for development is not about computers, mobile phones, and the Internet, but about help, support, and training people in linking them and communities for communication, learning and services. This will lead to improved well-being, increased work productivity, support for innovation and impetus for inclusive growth". The thrust areas of ICT strategies for development as envisaged by ADB are to create an enabling environment by fostering the development of innovative sector policies, strengthening public institutions, and developing ICT facilities and related infrastructure and networks. The World Bank states, "Information and communication technologies are a key input for economic development and growth. They offer opportunities for global integration while retaining the identity of traditional societies. ICT can increase poor people's economic and social well-being and empower individuals and communities. Finally, ICT can enhance the effectiveness, efficiency, and transparency of the public sector, including the delivery of social services". The ICT for development needs to emphasise the following dimensions of ICT: i) Information-centric: Focusing more on information and data and less on technology. In a knowledge society, information and knowledge are considered more powerful and important tools for empowerment. The Right To Information (RTI) Act in India empowers common citizens to get official information and play a proactive role in governance. ii) Chain-centric: The ICTs must provide the connected data about the main problem. For example, suppose the health status of a village is low. In that case, the ICT must provide data on infant mortality rate (IMR), institutional delivery, immunisation status, disease prevalence, etc., which are the determinants of health status. Sporadic information is dangerous and will cause more harm than benefit. It will not help the decision-maker to make appropriate decisions. iii) Society-centric: The ICTs need to provide data on social aspects such as health, education, the status of women, the role of youth in development, etc. Partial information is always dangerous and cannot be helpful to take corrective measures.

ICT: Conceptual iv) Economy-centric: The ICTs provide data and information about Framework economic development and enable new or more productive income- generating activities. For example, in Bangladesh, villagers purchased their phones through the national phone operators as members of the Grameen Bank and got accessible payphone services. ICT can communicate information about various development schemes, welfare programmes, and successful projects to rural people. v) Development-centric: ICT, to promote development, should be development centric. The ADB is helping its member countries integrate ICT components into sector development strategies, especially in education, health, and agriculture. The focus is improving public administration and finance management and providing various electronic services to citizens and businesses. The ICT should give information about the performance of various development sectors and programmes. vi) Manpower-Centric: ICT plays an important role in human resources development. A study claims that ICT diffusion accounts for up to a 90 per cent increase in the Human Development Index of some nations. Therefore, most ICT proponents suggest that ICT should focus more on people than just human efficiency and raise their knowledge and productivity. For this, the requirements of the people who benefit from ICT must be understood, and how ICT can be helpful must be chalked out. The ICT-enabled "Information Chain" for development is given in Fig.1.2
Fig. 1.2. ICT Information Chain
The three types of ICT-enabled development are: i) Direct Development ii) Networked Development iii) Grassroots Development i) Direct Development: In this model, ICTs deliver resources and services directly to the beneficiaries without any interventions of other development actors like NGOs, PRIs, SHGs, etc. The direct telecast of many government development programmes through ICT is a direct development endeavour. ii) Networked Development: In this model, instead of directly providing information or data to the beneficiaries, the state or private agencies act through other connected actors or institutions that can effectively use ICTs. Here, the primary source is interconnected. These intermediaries are interconnected with the main sources and interconnected among themselves.

iii) Grassroots Development: In the grassroots development model, the ICT For Development:
An Overview
main development agency, for example, the government, uses NGOs and other civil society organisations to reach the beneficiaries. Nowadays, the state as an actor of development is gradually transferring its onus to community-level organisations or civil society organisations. There are several successful examples of community development models. It is a democratic way of pursuing development. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: a) Use the spaces given below for your answers. b) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1) ICT should be Development centric-Justify?

2) Write a short note on the ICT-enabled grassroots model.

1.5 ICT AND SECTORAL DEVELOPMENT
ICTs play an important role in enabling the nation to achieve the objective of the Millennium Development Goals. The economic, social, and human development needs of the developing nations, in particular, cannot be met promptly and effectively without the innovative and strategic use of new technologies. The digital divide is also one of the reasons for differences in the percentage of achievements in various development indicators in rural and urban areas. It is remarked that the digital divide reflects existing disparities between the haves and have-nots. According to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), "The digital divide is a symptom of the existing economic and social divide, which will widen even in future, if developing countries are not helped to take advantage of ICT in tackling economic and social problems and are denied access to markets that are becoming increasingly ICT-dependent as a part of globalisation". The United Nations has developed an ICT Development Index, as shown in Table
1.1, in which Iceland occupies the first rank.
Table 1.1: Ranking of Nations on ICT Development Index, 2017 vs 2023
Rank Countries Value as of Value as of
2017 2023
1. Iceland 8.98 8.98
2. South Korea 8.85 9.12
3. Switzerland 8.74 8.91

ICT: Conceptual 4. Denmark 8.71 8.87 Framework
5. United Kingdom 8.65 8.65
10 Japan 8.43 8.59
14 Australia 8.24 8.33
16 USA 8.18 8.28
18 Singapore 8.05 8.12
29 Canada 7.77 7.83
Source: International Telecommunication Union ICT Development Index 2023
(https://www.itu.int/itu-d/reports/statistics/IDI2023/) The discrepancy in urban and rural development is a cause of concern for many developing countries. One such discrepancy is higher literacy rates in urban areas than rural areas. Therefore, E-development should aim to harness the ongoing technological revolution to achieve Millennium Development Goals, one of which is raising literacy and educational status. E-Development would systematically address the opportunities to use ICT for the competitiveness of developing economies, expand employment and earning opportunities, access market information, and lower transaction costs for the poor, women, marginalised communities, farmers, traders, and artisans. It will achieve higher agricultural and industrial growth rates and enhance the literacy and health status of the country's population. However, it is observed that many developing countries are still lagging in the use of ICTs in various sectors of development. One of the findings on the role of ICT in development reveals that the technological information infrastructure has failed to link the growing awareness of the importance of knowledge for development to the key actors and the information seekers who can carry forward the development actions bridging ICT. The optimal and innovative use of ICT tools will have a decisive bearing on the success or failure of development. ICT's decisive role in facilitating the successful implementation of development objectives is spelt out in the declaration of principles of the World Summit on Information Society. The role of ICT in the development of various sectors is narrated as follows:
1.5.1 ICT and Poverty Reduction
ICTs play an important role in poverty reduction strategies adopted by various countries. One of the main opportunities for using ICT in poverty reduction is to provide information and knowledge to rural populations and to empower local development agents to serve the poor. Lack of knowledge regarding various poverty alleviation schemes and their implementation procedures are important reasons for poor implementation of governmental programmes, particularly rural development programmes. The illiterate people have poor access to information and, therefore, cannot tap the benefits meant for their upliftment. To cite a few examples, Chile's electronic rural information system has enabled development actors such as NGOs,

municipalities, and extension agencies to transmit information on prices, ICT For Development:
An Overview
markets, inputs, weather, social services, and credit facilities for 40 per cent less than that using traditional methods. Another example is the land record computerisation in Karnataka, India, which has enabled the agencies to deliver land certificates within 15 minutes instead of 20-30 days and, in the process, has reduced transaction costs and corruption, created a viable land market, and enhanced the quality of life of the common man. The telecentre or the community information and communication centres are important in transmitting information about various government development initiative programmes to the common person. These centres have enabled rural communities to conduct local dialogue, share practical, locally relevant information, and support community problem-solving. According to M. Fontaine, digital literacy centres in Benin and Ghana have become an important instrument for empowering low-income communities, enhancing employability, increasing capabilities, and extending learning opportunities beyond those available in education institutions. While justifying the role of ICTs, Mohammed Yunus (See Chhavi, 2008), the architect of microfinance in Bangladesh, remarked that "there is an ongoing view that IT is irrelevant for the poor who are generally illiterate; IT is too expensive for them to reach out; the poor do not need fancy IT, they need food. These are the voices of the sceptics. Now, in three years, there are more than 5000 telephone ladies in Bangladesh villages doing roaring business in selling telephone services." Some of the lessons learned from the use of ICTs for poverty reduction are: i) Technologies used must be adequate to the skills of the poor to exploit their potential effectively; in other words, they must be user-friendly and pro-poor; ii) Content should receive as much attention as connectivity, and it must be people-centred, demand-driven and in local languages and iii) Ownership by the local communities, partnership, and networking are essential to effective poverty reduction programmes. Local NGOs and civil society organisations must be adequately involved through ICT for poverty reduction at the grassroots level.
1.5.2 ICT and Agriculture
Agriculture is the primary sector of development. ICT in agriculture is an emerging field that enhances agricultural productivity and growth rate. The technological revolution could benefit the agriculture sector through increased flow of information, transfer of capital and inputs and quality of various services provided to the agriculture sector. The role of ICT to enhance food security and support rural livelihoods is increasingly recognised and was officially endorsed at the World Summit on Information Services (WSIS, 2003-05). The ICT can potentially help the farming community in the following ways: i) Meet the information, technical and input needs of the farmer more efficiently; ii) Improve access to knowledge and technology among farmers and farmers-linked institutions;

ICT: Conceptual iii) Strengthen dialogue between and among farmers and farm-linked Framework institutions; iv) Promote interactive learning among farmers and other local organisations, such as panchayats, milk cooperative societies, WSHGs, and village farmers groups. All these will lead to an increase in farm outputs or more excellent value addition of farm products, increasing household incomes and quality of life of the farmers. Further, ICTs can promote trade and competitiveness of agricultural products and broaden agro-product markets, increasing domestic GDP. The FAO's e-Agriculture initiative aims to ensure systematic dissemination of information using ICTs on agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries, forestry, and food to provide ready access to comprehensive, up-to- date, and detailed knowledge and information, particularly in rural areas. Nowadays, ICTs play an important role in promoting public-private partnerships (PPP) in the area of ICTs for agricultural development. The four types of partnership which are desirable for agricultural development are: i) Providing affordable ICT access and connectivity to farmers and farm- linked institutions; ii) Providing relevant content to the experts, trainees, and extension agents; iii) Training and capacity building; iv) Projecting the locally available good practices; v) Promotion of contract farming through public-private partnership. vi) Enhancing farmer-to-farmer contact. We need to understand how far ICT initiatives can address the farmers' needs regarding agriculture development.
1.5.3 ICT and Education
ICT is a powerful tool for extending educational opportunities, both formal and non-formal, to all sections of society, particularly to the unserved sections of the population. The International Institute for Communication and Development (IICD) has emphasised that ICT can improve education quality by enhancing educational content development, supporting administrative processes in schools and other educational establishments, and increasing access to education for teachers and pupils via distance learning. Regarding the use of ICT in education, two concepts, e-learning and blended learning, have recently been used to fortify the role of ICT in education. According to Tinio (see Gunjan, 2014), "e-learning encompasses learning at all levels, both formal and non-formal that uses an information net-work-the Internet; an intranet (LAN) or extranet (WAN) - whether wholly or in part, of course, delivery, interaction and/or facilitation". Others prefer the term online learning, which is web-based learning in a subset of e-learning and refers to learning using an Internet browser. The other term used in educational technology is blended learning. It refers to learning models that combine traditional classroom practice with e-learning solutions. For example, students in a traditional class can be assigned print-based and online

materials, have online mentoring sessions with their teachers through chats ICT For Development:
An Overview
and subscribe to a class email list. UNESCO recognises that "These technologies have great potential for knowledge dissemination, effective learning, and the development of more efficient education services". In India, satellite-based teleconferencing (one-way video and two-way audio) non-formal education has been operational since 1992 at national and regional levels. The ICT mission for school education in India aims to devise, catalyse, support, and sustain ICT and ICT-enabled activities and processes to improve access quality and efficiency in the school system. According to UNESCO, ICTs can be used in education to: * Improve administrative efficiency. * Disseminate teaching learning materials to teachers and students. * Improve the ICT skills of teachers and students. * Allow teachers and students access to sources of information from around the world. * Share ideas on education and learning. * Collaborate on joint prospects. * Conduct lessons from a remote location. As emphasised by UNESCO, the six focus areas of ICT in education programmes are policy, teacher training, teaching, and learning, non-formal education, monitoring and measuring, research and knowledge sharing. The international institutions, as well as experts involved in communication and development, believe that ICTs in education will be of great help to achieve the Millennium Development Goals of universal primary education through the following ways: i) Teacher Training: Increase the supply of trained pre-service teachers through ICT-enhanced training and by creating teacher networks. ICT- enhanced teacher training programmes will be more effective and can be conducted faster than traditional methods. ii) Teaching and learning in the classroom: The capacity development of teachers to empower them to use ICT in the classroom and the development of curricula and support materials/resources through ICT. Teaching-learning through ICT will improve the process and raise the student attendance rate. It will enable teachers and students to use ICTs in their current and future teaching-learning processes. iii) Management and administration: Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of Ministries of Education and related bodies using ICTs for management and educational information. The department can use ICTs to procure records of educational institutions, teachers, and students and other loss and expenditure aspects relating to education. Online admission and online examination have fastened educational administration and made the administrative process cost-effective. iv) Policy and strategy: Integrating ICT policies and strategies into

ICT: Conceptual education policies will establish an enabling environment and improve Framework the overall strategic development of education. ICTs have also enabled educational planners to make educational policies, plans, and strategies accessible to teachers, students, administrators, and researchers. Feedback mechanisms have become easier with the advent of ICTs.
1.5.4 ICT and Health
The healthcare services will be improved, and the quality will be increased by the coordinated induction of information technology in all segments of the healthcare action chain; local, regional, and national health networks will strengthen cooperation and resource management in the healthcare sector. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), "Technology is the backbone of the services to prevent, diagnose and treat illness and disease. ICTs are only one category of the vast array of technologies that may be used. Given the right policies, organisation, resources and institution, ICTs can be powerful tools in the hands of those working to improve health". According to WHO, the use of ICTs in the health sector is not merely about technology but a means to reach a series of desired outcomes such as: i) Health workers making better treatment decisions; ii) Hospitals providing higher quality and safer care; iii) People making better choices about their health; iv) Governments are becoming more responsive to health needs; v) National and local information systems supporting the development of effective, efficient, and equitable health systems; vi) Policymakers and the public are aware of health risks and vii) People have better access to the information and knowledge they need for better health. The use of ICT in health care has become an important aspect of health development. Healthcare solutions provided by ICTs are popularly known as e-health. The tools and services contributing to e-health provide better and more efficient healthcare services. The use of e-health technologies allows a mutually beneficial collaboration and involvement of patients and medical professionals in preventing and treating chronic diseases. In Peru, Egypt and Uganda, effective use of ICTs has prevented avoidable maternal deaths. In South Africa, mobile phones have enabled patients to receive timely reminders to take their medication. In Cambodia, Rwanda, South Africa, and Nicaragua, multimedia communication programmes are increasing awareness of how to strengthen community response to HIV and AIDS. Lastly, e-learning development strategies may target ICT as a core technological competency, given its need and potential as a tool for competitiveness. According to Sidharthan and Lal (2003), targeting technologies with substantial potential and spill over effects is shown to have greater economic benefits.

Accurate, relevant, and up-to-date information is essential for health service ICT For Development:
An Overview
managers to recognise weaknesses in health service provisions and take action to improve service delivery. Therefore, developing an effective information system is a necessary precursor to managerial improvement in the healthcare system. The major elements of opportunities for ICT in primary health care are telemedicine and health services, health care data management, information systems, appropriate data collection devices and analysis tools, appropriate and affordable bio-medical equipment for grass root deployment, video/multi-model conferencing and e-connectivity and appropriate legal and administrative framework. The ICT intervention in health development can be broadly categorised into the following areas:
i) Telemedicine: According to the International Telecommunication
Union, telemedicine is a powerful tool for empowering health care delivery. According to WHO, telemedicine is dealing with health care services where distance is a critical factor by health care professionals using information and communication technologies for the exchange of vital information for diagnosis, treatment and prevention of diseases and injuries, research and evaluation and the continuing education of health care providers, all in the interest of advancing the health of individuals and their communities. E-health uses emerging information and communication technology, especially the Internet, to improve or enable health and health care. ii) Health Management Information System (HMIS): ICTs nowadays play an important role in most countries in maintaining medical records systems, district, block and village health status records, disease surveillance systems and health services delivery and recording systems. iii) E-learning and capacity building: ICTs are nowadays being used to build the capacity of health and health-related personnel by training institutions and NGOs involved in health sector developmental activities. The training organisations provide trainees with access to the Internet and other materials on recent developments in health education. iv) IEC on community-based health care delivery: Information Education and Communication (IEC) is one of the important components of community health care strategies. Many studies have found that using ICT materials in community orientation training on health has a better impact on knowledge, attitude, and behaviour. Some organisations dealing with health sector development emphasise local information access and telemedicine with a local indigenous knowledge base. v) Health Research: The role of ICTs in health research is undoubtedly one of the important components of ICT in health development. The bibliographies in health give several useful references that focus on the utility of ICT in health research. They also emphasise using electronic and online medical journals and ICTs to network with health researchers.

ICT: Conceptual vi) Health Campaigns: ICTs are used in large-scale health campaigns. Framework Most African countries are using ICTs for HIV/AIDS health campaigns. USAID of South Africa seeks the development of an innovative public- private partnership that uses ICTs to reduce the impact of HIV/AIDS in South Africa. The ICTs primarily used are mobile/ cellular technology, computer-based technology, radio, video television, web, and social networking. Media Lab Asia, 2005 recommendations on the use of ICT in different levels of the primary health care system are: i) The ICTs requirements for the centre are handheld computer devices for data collection and compilation, an enabled digital camera, a digital stethoscope, a digital glucometer, a portable digital weighing machine, an email facility, and a multimedia facility for training. ii) The ICTs requirements for the PHCs are a PC with printer and webcam, digital weighing machine, digital stethoscope, digital ECG machine, digital glucometer, diagnostic test kits, pulse oximeter, digital x-ray, digital microscope, digital ultrasound, etc iii) ICTs requirements for Community Health Centre (CHC) will be all the requirements at PHC and diagnostic kits, cardiac monitor, ICT augmented operation theatre, good communication and connectivity facilities like email, fax and video conferencing and good telemedicine facilities. It is rightly remarked that continuous development in ICTs has resulted in the increasing use of those technologies in medicine and the provision of medical care.
1.5.5 ICT and Women Empowerment
ICT can play a vital role in promoting women's empowerment in developing countries. There are many examples of women using new technologies to improve their businesses, create new businesses, or find new employment opportunities. However, most women, particularly those residing in rural and semi-urban areas, are still excluded from the digital economy. Women need to become active promoters of ICT and e-commerce and enhance their capacities in IT training and skills. Further, women need to become more involved in ICT policymaking and development to ensure that women's needs are incorporated in infrastructure, access, training, and education policies. ICTs can be a powerful catalyst for women's political and social empowerment. June Lennie (2002), citing the Australian case, said that many women in rural Australia take leadership in community and economic development activities and are often extremely reliant on various communication technologies for personal, family, business, and networking purposes. UNESCO intends to overcome the gender divide by providing opportunities to women in knowledge societies through the development of ICTs. The UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific) emphasised closing the gender divide through gender- responsive ICT capacity development for women's organisations and

enhanced women's access to the benefits of ICT so that ICT becomes a ICT For Development:
An Overview
central tool for women's empowerment and promotion of gender equality. The state of Kerala had initiated gender-focused approaches to ICTs and gender empowerment through Kudumbashree's ICT-based enterprise.
Kudumbashree ICT Unit
Techno World Digital Technologies (TDT) is a Kudumbashree ICT unit initiated in 1999 by ten women from below-poverty-line families. They provided US$300 of their own money, matched by a US$3,000 bank loan and a US$2,500 local government subsidy to purchase a basic computing set-up. By 2004, their total asset base had risen fivefold to a system of 22 computers plus computing peripherals worth US$30,000. The unit mainly undertakes data entry work for state government departments under the government's digitisation programme. It has also undertaken work such as CD rewriting and some website maintenance, and it also provides IT training to several government schools. Work patterns are based on two main shifts (7.30 AM to 1.00 PM and 1.00 PM to 6.30 PM), and 40 additional staff have been employed over and above the original 10 women members, including several men. Note: Kudumbashree, which means "Prosperity of the family," is an initiative of the Kerala State Poverty Eradication Mission (SPEM), which was launched on 1 April 1999 as a women-oriented participatory and integrated approach to fighting poverty. Source: https://e-space.mmu.ac.uk/97901/1/di_wp20.pdf(accessed on 10/ 9/2018).
1.6 E-DEVELOPMENT AND ITS STRATEGIES
E-development is a process that uses ICTs or ICT applications to provide information and knowledge services necessary to enhance productivity, efficiency, and quality of life. The International Institute for Communication and Development (IICD) considers e-development as that development by which 'e' means effective, 'e' means efficient, and 'e' means empowering. It uses ICTs to increase people's opportunities to empower poor people and counter insecurity and vulnerability. ICT has a far-reaching role to play in developing urban and rural nations. Many developed nations have grasped the advantages of ICT, which has contributed immensely to their socio- economic development. The redevelopment has occupied an important place in the paradigm of development. Therefore, an efficient e-development strategy is sine-qua-non for development. It is emphasised that the measure of success of ICT in development will not focus on the spread of technology but on overall progress towards economic growth and ultimately towards the Millennium Development Goals (Dutta et al., 2004). Some of the strategies to be followed for e-development are as follows: i) Raising awareness: An intensive campaign to propagate the role of ICT

ICT: Conceptual in development is very much required. All the national, regional, state Framework and even grassroots stakeholders need to be informed about ICT's role in development. The campaign should clarify the ICT options available for development and those that should be taken and used for development. Harnessing the role of the public, private sector, NGOs, and even civil societies will go a long way in promoting awareness of the role of ICT in development. ii) Building coalition: E-development strategies need a coalition framework in which the public and private sectors work together to become successful. A successful public-private partnership model is required for the knowledge-based global economy. iii) Clarifying roles and responsibilities: A national strategy should help to clarify the roles and responsibilities of various development actors, such as the government, private and civil society. The government needs to lead by setting the policy and institutional environment for promoting ICT industry development. However, it should not be viewed as a government-only strategy. iv) Scaling up: Scaling up intra- and inter-ICT sectors is required. Therefore, reform and innovations are required within the ICT sector. Besides, scaling up ICT intra-sector to other development sectors, like health, education, rural development, urban development, etc., is also essential for a nation's holistic development. Appropriate policy, institutional reforms, and change in management practices are required during the scaling up of commitment and knowledge about processes to diffuse and scale up best practices. v) Leveraging ICT: The role of e-development strategy can also be stated in terms of the three options for leveraging ICT, such as an industry or sector in its own right, as a general-purpose technology to be applied across sectors and an enabling infrastructure for empowerment and service delivery. To reduce the risks and improve the impact of targeting the ICT industry for promotion and focused efforts, governments should work with the private sector to identify target market opportunities, match specific niches to comparative advantage, systematically assess current constraints and jointly devise the policies and programmes to develop the industry and exploit market niches. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: a) Use the spaces given below for your answers. b) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1) What do you mean by e-Development?

2) Are ICTs useful for the development of health? Comment. ICT For Development:
An Overview

1.7 LET US SUM UP
ICT is considered one of the important tools for development in this era of globalisation. Many developed countries have already reaped the benefits of ICTs and have successfully utilised them in their development processes. This unit describes in detail the meaning of ICT and its role in developing different sectors such as education, health, agriculture, industry, poverty alleviation, and women's empowerment. It also deals with the concept of development and various strategies for e-development.
1.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Chhavi (2008), "ICT as a tool for poverty reduction", see
[https://bvicam.ac.in/news/INDIACom%202008%20Proceedings/pdfs/pa pers/119.pdf
2. Dutta, S., B. Lanvin and F. Pana (eds) (2004), Global Information
Technology Report 2003-04, Oxford University Press,
http://www.weforum.org
3. Gunjan N (2014), "ICT based education: A paradigm shift in India",
Techno LEARN, 4(1), pp 15-26.4. Health Link Worldwide (2006), "Improving health connections people:
The role of ICTs in the health sector of developing countries", www.healthlink.org.uk
5. IICD, "ICT for Education impact and lessons learned from IICD-
supported activities", International Institute for Communication and
Development, The Hague, Netherlands, Source: http://e-
space.openrepository.com/e-space/bits
6. IT Committee of the Secretary of State (1996), Den Norske. IT-veien bit
for bit, ISBN 82-7452-016-5.7. Luanne L (2002), "Rural women's empowerment in a communication
technology project: Some contradictory effects", Rural Society, Issue 12(3), pp 224-245.8. Media Lab Asia (2005). ICT for Primary Health Care, A Report
(Excerpts of the Report), New Delhi, www.medialabasia.in
9. Sharon YP Lin, http://www.undp.org.my/upload/ict4d.pdf
10. Siddharthan, N. S., & Lal, K. (2003), Liberalisation and growth of firms
in India. Economic and Political Weekly, 38(20), 1983-1988.11. UNDP "Information Communications Technology for Development"
Evaluation Office, No.5, September 2001,
[http://web.undp.org/evaluation/documents/essentials_5.pdf

ICT: Conceptual 12. UNDP-Asia Pacific Development Information Programme, UN Service Framework Building, Thailand.
13. WHO (2001), e-Health for Health Care Delivery: Strategy 2004-2007,
Geneva.
14. World Bank Global Information & Communication Technologies
Department, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Website Referred
1. http://www.asksource.info/pdf/framework2.polf
2. http://www.iidc.org/articles/IICDnews.import1757
3. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001295/129538e.pdf
4. http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/170610/16/16_chapter
%208.pdf
5. https://www.medialabasia.in/downloads/mlasia-ict-hc-rep-excerpts.pdf
6. http://www.infodev.org/infodev-
files/resource/InfodevDocuments_84.pdf
1.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS-POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1) ICT refers to 'information', 'communication', and 'technology'.
Generally, we seek information and communicate it to others through technology who may also be interested in its value. Technology plays an important role in the effective transaction and communication of knowledge information to its seekers. ICT includes hardware, processes, and systems used to store and manage communications and share information.
2) The Internet carries a vast array of information resources and services,
most notably the interlinked hypertext documents of the World Wide Web (WWW) and the infrastructure to support electronic mail, in addition to popular services such as video on demand, online shopping, online gaming, exchange of information from one-to-many or many-to- many by online chat, online social networking, online publishing, file transfer, file sharing and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) or teleconferencing, telepresence person-to-person communication via voice and video. Check Your Progress: 2
1) ICT, to promote development, should be development centric. Asian
Development Bank is helping its member countries integrate ICT components into sector development strategies, especially in education, health, and agriculture. The focus is improving public administration and finance management and providing various electronic services to citizens and businesses. The ICT should give information about the performance of various development sectors and programmes.

2) ICT effectively develops rural areas at the grassroots level by transacting ICT For Development:
An Overview
information about various developmental projects and programmes to the countryside masses. Check Your Progress: 3
1) E-development is a process of development that uses ICTs or ICT
applications to provide information and knowledge services necessary to enhance productivity, efficiency, and quality of life. "The International Institute for Communication and Development (IICD) considers e- development to be that development by which 'e' means effective; 'e' means efficient, and 'e' means empowering.
2) The use of ICT in health care has become an important aspect of health
development. Healthcare solutions provided by information and communication technology (ICT) are popularly known as "e-health". The tools and services contributing to e-health provide better and more efficient healthcare services. The use of e-health technologies allows a mutually beneficial collaboration and involvement of patients and medical professionals in preventing and treating chronic diseases.

I CT: Conceptual UNIT 2 IMPLEMENTATION OF ICT4D
Framework Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 Introduction to ICT4D
2.2.1 Definition of ICT4D and its Significance in Global Development.
2.2.2 Brief historical Overview of the Evolution of ICT4D Initiatives.
2.3 Key Components of ICT4D
2.3.1 Digital Infrastructure: The Importance of Reliable and Accessible
Digital Infrastructure.
2.3.2 Human Capacity: Role of Education and Training in Building Human
Capacity for ICT4D.
2.4 Case Studies of Successful ICT4D Projects
2.4.1 Highlights of Specific Projects that have Effectively Implemented ICT
for Development.
2.5 Challenges in ICT4D Implementation
2.5.1 Digital Divide: Analysing Disparities in Access to Technology and
Information.
2.5.2 Cultural and Societal Factors: Discuss how Cultural Nuances Affect the
Acceptance and Success of ICT4D Initiatives.
2.6 Ethical Considerations in ICT4D
2.6.1 Privacy Issues: Ethical Implications of Data Collection and Usage in
Development Projects
2.6.2 Ensuring Inclusivity: Strategies to Prevent Exclusion and Ensure the
Benefits of ICT4D Reach all Segments of Society
2.7 Let Us Sum Up
2.8 Keywords
2.9 Further Readings
2.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answer
2.0 INTRODUCTION
The debate around development started in the 1950s and 1960s and continues today. There has not been an absolute answer to defining or specific to the bee development path. However, some issues have indeed been identified as integral to development. For instance, eradicating poverty, eliminating illiteracy, and ensuring physical and mental health have become intrinsic to development. Many tools have been used for development worldwide to achieve these targets. Information, communication, and technology (ICT) have also emerged as important tools for development. ICT largely refers to the use of

digital technologies in any sector, and since these ICTs are being used for Implementation of
ICT4D
development, this use of ICTS in the development process is termed ICT4D. ICT4D has largely benefited the development process, and because of modernisation or the dominant paradigm of development, the use of technology has been encouraged. Many initiatives have been taken for development in different areas, including health, agriculture, and education, where ICTs are being used to benefit the communities. However, we need to note that the integration of ICTs has not remained easy and smooth as both the physical and human resource infrastructure are still taking shape in some countries, particularly developing countries. We need to note that implementing ICT4D has not been without challenges. Hence, this Unit will introduce you to the evolution of ICT4D and the present situation, especially regarding challenges and ethical concerns.
2.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the evolution of ICT4D initiatives; * Comprehend the key components of ICT4D; * Analyse the challenges and ethical concerns of ICT4D; and * Gain an insight into the successful ICT4D projects.
2.2 INTRODUCTION TO ICT4D
ICT4D uses Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) for development. This term became popular with the increasing use of ICTs in different sectors for development worldwide. As we have learnt in the history of development paradigms, technology has become an important development component. From the initial definitions under the modernisation paradigm, ICTs nowadays have become integral to development. ICTs can be traced back to Daniel Lerner's belief in the potential of mass media technologies to modernise traditional societies (Melkote & Steeves, 2015). Hence, ICT4D is not a recent approach to development but has evolved from the 1950s onwards. Therefore, ICTs include the digital technologies of the present times and comprise the analogue technologies of radio and television (Melkote & Steeves, 2015). This integration of ICTs has happened owing to the adoption of ICTs in every aspect of life in all the world countries, including developing countries. Before going further, let us investigate the definitions of ICT4D and its evolution in detail.
16.2.1 Definition of ICT4D and its Significance in Global
Development Heeks (2018) defined ICT4D as "the application of any entity that processes or communicates digital data in order to deliver some part of the international development agenda in a developing country" (p.11). Melkote and Steeves (2015) state that ICT4D can be referred to as possibilities created through access and use of ICTs for modernisation.

ICT: Conceptual UN (n.d.) says that the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) Framework Geneva 2003 - Tunis 2005, the Copenhagen Declaration, and the Tunis Commitment all emphasised the potential of ICTs in the overall development of the countries, including economic, political, and social development. Further recognising the role of ICTs in development, the UN mentions that ICTs enable individuals and communities to create, access, utilise and share information and knowledge to achieve their full potential in promoting their development and improving their quality of life. ICT4D is becoming increasingly popular as integrating ICTs has made the development process cheaper (relative cost- one computer can serve many), quicker and benefits many simultaneously. However, at the same time, it should be noted that as ICT4D is a concept generally applicable to developing countries, the challenges in developing countries are still prevalent in terms of fewer resources, inequality, and less investment. Therefore, there is no denying that implementing ICT4D is important not only for developing countries but also for development at the global level. However, the implementation must be done, taking challenges in its ambit.
2.2.2 Brief Historical Overview of the Evolution of ICT4D
Initiatives As you have learnt in earlier Units from the beginning of discussions around development, technology has been an important development pillar. ICT4D has extended this aspect of technology as it emphasises the use of information and communication technology in all aspects of life rather than being limited to the use of technology in the production process. ICT evolved from IT (Information Technology) to include the Communication aspect. The term IT was limited as it intended to provide only information to its users rather than communicate with them. It had more to do with government, multinational corporations, and one-dimensional economic growth than overall development. The inclusion of 'Communication' in IT made it more encompassing as ICTs aimed to give information to its users and give them a platform to share and communicate with the provider and fellow users. Further, this process of sharing information and ideas with the provider of information (which remains most of the time, government, or sometimes non- governmental organisations) and fellow users was gradual and not sudden. Rather, ICT, in the beginning, was almost equivalent to IT and, hence, can be called ICT4D 0.0, in which communication or interaction aspect was lacking. Heeks (2008) mentions that ICT4D 0.0 was chiefly used in government offices to share information inside offices only, whereas in ICT 1.0, ICTs were brought out from the confines of government offices to rural areas. The most popular projects under ICT 1.0 in the first decade of the 21st century were telecentres, where a computer or desktop was installed with an internet connection in a small room largely meant to provide information to the villagers (Heeks, 2008). The idea for these projects was directly taken from the developed Western world and implemented in rural areas of the developing world without much consideration of the socio-cultural context of developing countries. Hence, these projects did introduce technology in these far-off areas but could not prove very beneficial and sustainable as

community involvement would not be generated much. This was also when Implementation of
ICT4D
the UN adopted eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) at the international level to define the development direction in 2000. A period of 15 years was kept achieving these goals, and though the role of ICTs was not explicitly explained, ICTs were taken as one of the important tools to achieve development under MDGs since some of the ICT4D was already showing results. After these initial projects came under ICT4D 2.0, interaction and feedback were given more importance to make the projects more sustainable. Heeks (2008) says there is no clear distinction between when ICT4D1.0 ended and when ICT4D2.0 started. Rather, ICT 2.0 is still evolving. This phase may be related to the adoption of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) after the experience of MDGs in which the role of ICTs was made an implicit part of some of the targets under specific goals. Figure 1 shows the evolution of ICT4D, and perceptions related to how ICTs were ignored or isolated initially, slowly giving way to integration and innovation in ICT4D projects. Figure 1: Changing Views on ICTs and Development (Source: Heeks (2008)) Check your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you understand by ICT4D?

2.3 KEY COMPONENTS OF ICT4D
ICT4D comprises two key components: the establishment of Digital Infrastructure and the building of Human Capacity. Both are equally important, as one cannot function without the other. Some of the early initiatives have not been very successful as more emphasis was placed on one

ICT: Conceptual aspect of the ICT4D, ignoring the other. Hence, we need to learn both Framework components in detail, which are as follows:
2.3.1 Digital Infrastructure: The Importance of Reliable and
Accessible Digital Infrastructure
Digital Infrastructure refers to establishing the physical infrastructure needed for development in different sectors of the economy and society. It consists of the technologies required to reach the participants in the development process. Among other technologies, it may include radio, television, mobile phones, computers, and internet connectivity. We have seen that these technologies have been made available in many parts of the world, including the developing world and the farther rural areas. Nearly 70% of the world's population has become internet users (ITU, 2023). However, most of the infrastructure was not sustainable in its working. Most development projects have been made operational once, but more attention is needed to make them sustainable. Problems like an irregular supply of electricity and repair and maintenance have led to the discontinuance of these projects. Lately, however, with the reach of handy digital devices and the widespread internet network, digital infrastructure has been gaining a foothold in inaccessible areas. The accessibility of digital infrastructure also needs to be understood in terms of language issues. We know that most technologies have been developed by multinational corporations that use English as their only language--people who need help understanding English face many challenges in accessing these technologies. Though many initiatives have now incorporated regional languages in their digital content, more attention is still needed to understand this aspect of the accessibility of ICTs.
2.3.2 Human Capacity: role of education and training in
building human capacity for ICT4D Human capacity refers to the ability and capacity of the people to operate the digital infrastructure. The aim of building human capacity remains not only to operate the technologies but also to operate them so that maximum output may be derived from using technology for the community around them. Establishing the digital infrastructure is just one part of the ICT4D initiatives; inculcating digital skills among the community is an equally important part of these initiatives to utilise the full potential of these technologies. Imparting skills and building capacities among community members to operate these ICTs are also important for the sustainability of these digital initiatives, as some of the early projects failed owing to a lack of human resources who could operate and utilise these technologies. When the physical infrastructure was set up, some experts came to operate it but left after some time, leaving the infrastructure useless as nobody in the community knew how to maintain and utilise it. Digital skills are the skills needed to operate the digital infrastructure. These also include language skills, as most of the content available through ICTs is in English, which might need to be understood at regional and local levels, 32 especially in rural areas.

Check Your Progress: 2 Implementation of
ICT4D
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. List the key components of ICT4D.

2.4 CASE STUDIES OF SUCCESSFUL ICT4D
PROJECTS
Numerous projects related to ICT4D have been undertaken in different parts of the world from the early 1970s to the present. As discussed, ICT4D projects utilised recent digital technologies and mass media, such as radio and television, to reach the marginalised sections in different countries. These projects have been implemented in agriculture, education, health, and small- rural entrepreneurship. In the next section, we will discuss some of the projects which may be termed successful stories of ICT4D projects. It may be kept in mind that these projects might not be able to achieve all the targets that they had set for the beneficiaries but were at least able to utilise comparatively new tools of development, ICTs, in the development process and could learn from the cavities that hindered the full potential of the projects.
2.4.1 Highlights of Specific Projects that have Effectively
Implemented ICT for Development
The Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) in India, the Palapa Experiment in Indonesia, and experiments with satellite-based rural telephony in Peru were some earlier examples of ICTs in the 1970s and 1980s (Melkote & Steeves, 2015). SITE was a one-year experiment conducted during 1975-76 in India in which satellite Television was used for disseminating information related to various aspects, including agriculture, education, and health for diverse rural populations. Nearly 2400 villages belonging to different linguistic, cultural, climatic, and agricultural regions of the country were covered under the project. The programme content was also a combination of centralisation and decentralisation as some of the content was produced in centrally located studios with the help of experts. In contrast, some programmes were produced locally to connect to the local population. SITE was designed to give policymakers, programme producers, and social scientists insights into how TV can be used to further develop in diverse socio-economic and cultural situations.

ICT: Conceptual The Palapa Ring project in Indonesia, initiated in 1976, aimed at connecting Framework all the islands in the country. The project attempted to provide internet access to all provinces in the country by 2019. Still, the evaluation of the project shows that internet access provided under the project has led to an increase only in personal computing consumption. In contrast, the processes at workplaces or educational institutions have not benefited much from it (Gupta, n.d.). The internet access under the project has reached the villages, but the information being provided to villagers needs to be more specific to their needs to reap maximum benefit from using ICTs in development projects. The Rural Communication Services Project (RCSP) was launched in Peru to integrate satellite communication into rural development. The project was based on the premise that connecting villages through telecommunications would enable them to overcome infrastructure and other resource limitations. The project introduced telephony in many rural areas of Peru, but solid institutional support, sound management, and dynamic leadership were needed to fully benefit the users (Tietjen et al., 1987). Another popular project launched in India, which was among the pioneers in e-governance projects, was Gyandoot. Gyandoot, which means "Purveyor of Knowledge" in Hindi, was an intranet-based service portal implemented in India's Dhar district of Madhya Pradesh in 2000 (Bhatnagar et al., 2003). This portal was made available to villagers through information kiosks, which were set up in different villages. Villagers, with the help of a person who was managing the kiosk, could register their complaints or grievances to government officials sitting in their villages and access information related to different fields, including crop prices or details of land. The project evaluation showed that people felt they could approach government officials much quicker through these kiosks (Bhatnagar et al., 2003). In e-governance, governments of many countries have started web portals to provide information on all government services and schemes on one platform. The National Portal of India was one such initiative taken up by the Indian government in 2005 and continues to provide information related to varied fields like agriculture, social development, law and justice, environment, and youth and sports. With the increasing penetration of digital technologies, including mobile phones, computers, and the Internet, after the 2000s, many governmental and non-governmental organisations have introduced projects related to these digital technologies where various services were provided to users on their mobile phone handsets. Many people belonging to marginalised sections, especially in rural areas, were provided with digital devices like mobile phones and laptops to access the benefits of ICTs in the development process. However, again, challenges like lack of maintenance facilities and lack of digital skills have slowed down the progress of these projects to some extent. However, after evaluating these projects, more sustainable strategies have been adopted where community members have been involved in ICT4D right from the decision-making to implementation and, finally, evaluation of projects.

Implementation of
Activity: 1
ICT4D
Identify any ICT4D in your nearby area and analyse its implementation.

2.5 CHALLENGES IN ICT4D
IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation of ICT4D has not been without challenges. Two challenges, the digital divide, and socio-cultural differences, have remained primary in using ICTs for Development.
2.5.1 Digital Divide: Analysing Disparities in Access to
Technology and Information
Digital Divide, as the name suggests, refers to the gap that has developed due to the lack of access to and use of digital technologies in some countries. The developing world lacked access to and use of digital technologies, hence adding one more parameter: lagging behind the developed world or the Global North. A report by ITU (2017) found that European countries continue to lead in developing ICTs. In contrast, countries in the continent of Africa have still seen the least development of ICTs. It should be noted here that not only the reach and access that have created disparities in the use of ICTs but also the skill level of users has led to the digital divide. Most of the time, the focus remains on making digital technology accessible among community members through government and non-governmental organisations while not making the community members capable of using the technology. Rather, in the early initiatives, organisations introduced the technology used to bring in their expert personnel to operate the technologies, making the community members dependent on this person. However, with the coming up of personal digital devices like mobile phones, digital literacy has become an important part of implementing ICT4D. A closer look would reveal that this digital divide not only exists in terms of countries, but many other sections of society face this digital divide. For instance, the gender digital divide has also become apparent as fewer women than men would usually be able to access and use digital technologies. A report by ITU (2017) mentions that the digital gender divide is relatively small in developed countries and more pronounced in developing countries. In contrast, it is substantial in Least Developed Countries (LDCs). Similarly, compared to urban areas, rural areas would face many barriers to accessing digital technologies, keeping rural areas or villages at a disadvantage. ITU (2023) states that only 50% of people in rural areas, compared to 81% in urban areas, can access the Internet. Even in the case of age groups, we see that generally, youth have both access and skills to use ICTs, whereas older people remain aloof from the digital world. A report by ITU (2017) states that the proportion of the population aged 15-24 years who are online is estimated to be over 70% compared to 48 % of the overall population, adding that older adults are less likely to be online.

ICT: Conceptual 2.5.2 Cultural and Societal Factors: Discussing how Cultural Framework
Nuances Affect the Acceptance and Success of ICT4D
Initiatives Socio-cultural factors have remained another big challenge in the implementation of ICTs. As we have seen in the evolution of ICT4D, most digital initiatives have been taken up originally in the developed world of Western countries and replicated in the developing world of Eastern countries. Under modernisation or the dominant paradigm of development, when technology adoption was considered one of the major paths for development in developing countries, these digital initiatives were implemented in developing countries without considering socio-cultural factors. Rather, in the 1950s and 1960s, a clear distinction was made regarding the characteristics of traditional and modern societies. Along with more use of technology in modern societies than in traditional societies, traditional societies were also termed as having less empathy, close-knit communities, limited view of the world, and less openness to innovation and experimentation. Hence, all these factors have played a role in hindering the adoption of digital technologies and continue to slow down the rate of adoption of ICTs in developing countries. For instance, community members in developing countries believe in subsistence production. This production can fulfil their own needs, and they think that if they aspire for more, they might interfere with the share of others. Therefore, they still do not appreciate the technologies that encourage mass production. Along similar lines, religion has always remained a very important part of their lives, and hence, the use of many technologies sometimes does not go by their beliefs and norms. Gender, too, plays an important role in many countries. Women are still not considered to be capable enough to use ICTs independently. ITU (2023) states that there is only a 5% difference in internet usage among men and women at the world level, but it increases to 10% in the case of Africa. Hence, the socio-cultural factors of every community need to be kept in mind before introducing technology so that the technology can be used efficiently and effectively by the community members. Figure 2 depicts the changing issues and concerns regarding the use of ICT4D over time. It shows that the implementation of ICT4D starts with the reach and accessibility of ICTs in a particular community and ends with the culmination of evaluating the community's goals. Figure 2: Changing ICT4D Issues Over Time (Source: Heeks (2008))

Check Your Progress: 3 Implementation of
ICT4D
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How do you think the digital divide hinders ICT4D?

Activity: 2
1. Look for a project related to ICT4D in your nearby area and analyse if
the implementing agency faced any challenges in implementing it.

2. Identify if there is any group of community members who have not
been able to access (digital divide) the ICT4D.

2.6 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN ICT4D
Despite challenges in most countries, ICTs have been much appreciated and accommodated, as the digital world is the only way forward. However, some ethical issues regarding using ICTs in development are still being discussed. Invasion of privacy and ensuring inclusivity are considered concerns from an ethical point of view in implementing ICT4D. Both the concerns are discussed below: -
2.6.1 Privacy Issues: Ethical Implications of Data Collection
and Usage in Development Projects
ICTs are being seen as invasive as most technologies are individualistic. To make these technologies more effective and custom-made, they collect a lot of personal information about the people they intend to benefit from. However, since people, especially in developing countries, are not used to sharing personal details like age and income, people in these countries have become even more scared of using these technologies. Furthermore, since many of the projects related to ICT4D, especially in the initial period, were handled by Multinational Corporations (MNCs) and many trace the origin of technology-driven initiatives to the Western capitalistic world, thinkers in the field of ICT4D and users themselves remain wary of the motives of implementing agencies of ICT4D. MNCs have often used the data collected

ICT: Conceptual to implement ICT4D and further their commercial interests. Rather, some Framework studies have pointed out that this data is also being used for political purposes as it is vast. A term has also been devised for this kind of data: Big data. Big data is a large dataset generated with the help of ICTs. It can be used to reach many people with specific aims and may also be used to analyse the attributes of the public.
2.6.2 Ensuring Inclusivity: Strategies to Prevent Exclusion
and Ensure the Benefits of ICT4D Reach all Segments
of Society
As discussed above in the challenges to implementing ICT4D, the digital divide has remained an important concern; ensuring inclusivity has also emerged as an ethical concern due to the diversity in different societies and communities. In fact, 'inclusive development' has become an important term in development studies. It refers to all development, irrespective of gender, caste, class, religion, or race. It aims to develop every member of the society or community rather than benefiting some community members. The debate around inclusivity started immediately after the modernisation or dominant paradigm as the steps taken under this paradigm had led to the development of only a few sections of the society, leaving many behind and, hence, creating a further gap between 'haves' and 'have-nots'. Lately, however, it has been realised that the strategies adopted in the early stages of development need to be revised to take everyone along. Taking everyone along would make the development inclusive and sustainable, where we do not need to care about future resources or generations, as inclusive development would ensure stability. To unite all the stakeholders, various strategies are being deployed by the government and NGOs. A horizontal approach to development and communication is encouraged to ensure inclusivity instead of a vertical approach. Rather, in the present times, both approaches are combined to elicit maximum benefit. The horizontal approach to development and communication refers to bringing in all the stakeholders of the development process in one place, holding discussions and devising the development plan instead of implementing the plans made by central-level experts in a far-off community, paying less attention to the community's specific needs. The vertical approach emphasises a top-down approach, whereas the horizontal approach encourages a bottom-up strategy in which community members are encouraged to identify their problems and devise their development path. Horizontal development also encourages self- development, which produces more. When people own and take responsibility for their development, they work more passionately for it, maximising the benefit for all. Similarly, Participatory approaches have also been encouraged for undertaking development where community members participate in every step of development, from decision-making to generating resources for the project to executing the project on the ground level and then evaluating the project. This evaluation of the project provides a road map for future development projects.

Check Your Progress: 4 Implementation of
ICT4D
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What strategies are being incorporated in ICT4D projects to ensure
inclusivity?

2.7 LET US SUM UP
ICT4D has become an integral part of the development process as ICTs have become intrinsic to all aspects of our lives. Having been initiated into the development process in the early 1990s as one of the tools, today, ICTs have become important as the reach and access of ICTs have increased multi-fold. Many initiatives are being taken to keep ICTs at the centre, both by government and non-government organisations. However, the implementation of ICT4D has not been without challenges and concerns. Establishing digital infrastructure and building human capacities are still posing challenges in the path of ICT4D. Also, sometimes, intrusive use of ICTs and ensuring inclusivity become ethical concerns due to stakeholders' diversity in the development process. However, despite all these challenges and concerns, initiatives in ICT4D are being taken up by development agencies, and transversing on the development path by these agencies is also taking place with the active participation of community members.
2.8 KEYWORDS
Digital Divide- The gap exists between those who can access and use digital technologies and those who cannot. Digital Literacy is the ability to access, manage, understand, integrate, communicate, evaluate, and create information safely and appropriately through digital technologies. Sustainable development is the kind of development in which the needs of the present generation are met without compromising on the needs of future generations. Inclusive development refers to all development, irrespective of gender, caste, class, religion, or race. Big Data- Big data is the large datasets which are being generated with the help of ICTs and can be used or analysed to reach many people with the specific aim.

ICT: Conceptual 2.9 FURTHER READINGS
Framework
1. Bhatnagar, S., Dewan, A., Moreno, T.M. & Kanungo, P. (2003).
Gyandoot Project: ICT initiative in Dhar, Madhya Pradesh (English). Empowerment case studies Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/621851468267614396/Gyan doot-Project-ICT-initiative-in-the-district-of-Dhar-Madhya-Pradesh
2. Gupta, S. (n.d.). Palapa Ring Project: Indonesia's Digitalization.
https://aciperspectives.com/2021/10/22/palapa-ring-project-indonesias- digitalisation/
3. Heeks, R. (2008). "ICT4D2.0: the next phase of applying ICT for
international development", IEEE Computer,41(6), 26-33.4. Heeks, R. (2018). Information and Communication Technology for
Development (ICT4D). Routledge.
5. ITU. (2017). Measuring the Information Society Report 2017: Executive
summary. https://www.itu.int/en/ITU- D/Statistics/Documents/publications/misr2017/MISR2017_ES_E.pdf
6. ITU. (2023). Measuring digital development: Facts and Figures 2023.
https://www.itu.int/hub/publication/d-ind-ict_mdd-2023-1/
7. Melkote, S. R. & Steeves, H.L. (2015). Communication for
Development: Theory and Practice for Empowerment and Social Justice. Sage.
8. Tietjen, K., Shaw, W. & Block, C.H. (1987). The impact of Telephone
networks on rural and educational development: Experiences of the AID rural satellite program. https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNABH188.pdf.
9. UN. (n.d.).
https://www.un.org/development/desa/socialperspectiveondevelopment/i ssues/information-and-communication-technologies-icts.html
2.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWER
Check Your Progress: 1
1. ICT4D uses Information, Communication, and Technology (ICT) for
development. This term became popular with the increasing use of ICTs in different sectors for development worldwide. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The following are the key components of ICT4D: -
i. Establishment of Digital Infrastructure ii. Building of Human Capacity

Check Your Progress: 3 Implementation of
ICT4D
1. By creating a gap between the people with access to ICTs and those
without access, the digital divide has given rise to another divide between 'haves' and 'have-nots. It has created a section of people who cannot reap the benefits of ICT4D as they neither have access to digital infrastructure nor the digital skills to access the technologies. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Participatory approaches to development are encouraged to ensure
inclusivity in ICT4D so that community members can participate in every step of development, from decision-making to generating resources for the project to executing the project on the ground level and then also evaluating the project. Similarly, attention is paid to horizontal approaches instead of solely relying on vertical or top-down approaches.

ICT: Conceptual UNIT 3 ICT AND DIGITAL DIVIDE
Framework Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 What is the Digital Divide?
3.3 What is Development?
3.4 How are Development and the Digital Divide interlinked?
3.5 ICT in India
3.5.1 Role of ICT in Development
3.5.2 ICT and Governance in India
3.6 Prerequisites for Proper Functioning of ICT
3.7 Let Us Sum Up
3.8 Further Readings
3.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
Digital Divide means the gap in access and usage of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Initially, the Digital Divide indicated the division between those with and without telephone access. However, since the late 1990s, the term has been used mainly to refer to the divide between people with access to the Internet (particularly broadband) and people without access to the Internet. Over the years, the term Digital Divide has achieved numerous connotations and can be found to manifest at multiple levels. It may manifest as a divide between rural and urban areas, rich and poor, literate, and illiterate, socio-economic groups, or more developed and less industrially developed nations. It may also exist due to a technological divide in the form of low-performing computers, low-speed wireless connections, or an economic divide in the form of broadband or internet services pricing. In developed economies where the service sector plays a vital role in GDP, a higher digital divide can prove counterproductive to Development since Information and Communication Technology (ICT) plays a vital role in such economies, and a higher digital divide is indicative of the fact that access to ICT is not uniform across the social and economic strata.
3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand what the Digital Divide means; * Explain the interlinkage between Digital Divide and Development; * Understand the level of internet penetration in India; * Explain the role of social media in driving internet access in India; and 42 * Enumerate influences of ICT in commerce.

3.2 WHAT IS THE DIGITAL DIVIDE? ICT and Digital Divide
The Digital Divide may refer to the gap between demographics and regions with access to ICT and those that do not have access to it or, at the most, have restricted access due to economic, technical, or social reasons, say lesser bandwidth (technical reason). The Digital Divide may also refer to the gap in access and usage between people of the same region due to inhibiting reasons of socio-economic disparity. A poor person who has to manage the daily bread for himself and his family hardly has the time and resources to access Information and Communication Technology (ICT), either for his leisurely or economic activities. A country like India, where 55% of the workforce is engaged in agriculture (Census 2011) with 118.7 million cultivators, hardly has access to ICT for the population living at the subsistence level. Coupled with this is the high cost of Internet access, which inhibits even the well-off from accessing ICT for leisure or economic activities. Therefore, the Digital Divide essentially refers to the gap between people, households, and geographic areas at different socio-economic tiers concerning their opportunity to access ICTs and their Internet use for several chores. The term "Digital Divide" might have raised several doubts and questions in you, such as 'Where does it occur and why?', 'What are its causes?', 'How can it be measured?', "What are the factors which affect it?', 'How can it be reduced?' etc. Well, we will investigate each one by one. But first, let's understand the term 'Development'.
3.3 WHAT IS DEVELOPMENT?
There are various definitions of development, depending upon the perspective from which we are looking. Consequently, we have Economic
Development, Social Development, Material development, Immaterial
Development, Inclusive Development, etc. In its simplest sense, development can be understood as progress or growth towards a desired direction. This progress or growth can have an economic or social dimension, material or immaterial, inclusive, or exclusive. However, in most cases, the word development is often spoken with economic intent. The term "development" in international usage implies the need and methods for providing better living conditions for people, especially those residing in poor countries. It includes not just economic growth, though that is crucial, but also human development--which implies providing for health, nutrition, sanitation, education, and a sustainable environment. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) uses a more elaborate definition of development, which aims 'to enable people to lead long and healthy lives, to be knowledgeable, to have access to the resources which enable a decent standard of living and to participate in the life of the community.' Development is, therefore, empowerment. It should be aimed at unshackling people from obstacles that constrain their abilities to advance their lives and

ICT: Conceptual those of the communities. In 2000, the UN Millennium Declaration was Framework adopted, which aimed to remove poverty, buttress human dignity and equality, and realise peace, democracy, and environmental sustainability. The eight goals enshrined in the declaration reflect the meaning and aim of development that the UN envisages. These eight goals are-
1. To ensure environmental sustainability.
2. To remove extreme poverty and hunger
3. To ensure gender equality and to empower women.
4. To improve maternal health
5. To achieve universal primary education
6. To tackle the menace of HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases
7. To develop a global partnership for development
8. To reduce the child mortality rate
The role of ICT in pursuing the aforementioned objectives of the UN can be that of a facilitator.
3.4 HOW DEVELOPMENT AND DIGITAL
DIVIDE ARE INTERLINKED?
If we chart the growth of the economy since early civilisation, we will come across three stages: i. Agricultural economy phase ii. Industrial economy phase, and finally iii. Service economy phase. Agriculture played an important role in human civilisation. Civilisation develops only with settled agriculture. During the agricultural phase, man uses his skills upon nature to produce and fulfil his material needs. He lived in this phase for centuries, where he carved out glorious empires and built magnificent buildings. However, a turning point occurred with the Industrial Revolution's advent in 18th C. AD. The whole process of production undergoes a drastic change. The earlier manual mode of production gave way to the machine mode of production, drastically reducing the time required for production and increasing the quality of goods produced. Technology played an important role in this phase, and the growth or development of the economy became contingent upon technology. However, the third phase, i.e., the emergence of the service economy, played (and continues to play) a dominant role in a country's economy and, consequently, its development. It must be noted that the emergence of this sector coincided with the emergence of Information and Communication Technology. ICT prepared the ground for the emergence and proliferation of the service sector. It is here that ICT (and its demographic corollary- digital divide) plays an important role in development. Given the role ICT has attained in the service sector, the transition of any country from a developing 44 to a developed economy without it is considered unimaginable.

Since there is no unanimity upon the definition of a developed and ICT and Digital Divide developing economy (or country), the basic difference, as far as our study is concerned, can be presumed to be the relative share of the primary and tertiary sectors in the economy of the country. While developed economies usually have a larger tertiary sector and most of the workforce is engaged in its service industries, agriculture (primary sector) is the major contributor to the country's GDP in less developed economies. Therefore, ICT becomes pivotal in a developed economy since the service industry is existentially dependent on it. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How would you define the Digital Divide, and what factors contribute to
its existence in today's society?

2. Explore various dimensions of development beyond economic growth
and discuss how they relate to societal progress and well-being.

3. Discuss the interconnectedness between the Digital Divide and
Development.

3.5 ICT IN INDIA
It becomes pertinent to peek into the role and reach of ICT in India. Before we proceed, let us have a statistical look at the level of internet penetration in India. Though India has 460 million Internet users and is ranked as the second largest online market after China, its Internet penetration is dismal when counted in terms of the percentage of people accessing the Internet. Nevertheless, ICT has stimulated progress across various dimensions of society, from connecting individuals to spreading across businesses and governments. Unfortunately, a digital divide exists in accessibility between higher-income and lower-income nations. High-income countries will inevitably show greater penetration of information communication technology than less developed countries. What is needed is that to be able to uphold greater social development in the world, it is vital to escalate access to digital technology universally.

ICT: Conceptual There has been exponential growth in internet users in the past two decades. Framework The increasing penetration of information communication technology by bridging the existing digital divide is directly related to any nation's greater social growth. It is also important to build up the consistent human capital required to use the technology optimally. ICT can benefit the economy by increasing output, but only if people with access to the technology have the necessary potential to make the best use of it. We can state here that to bring greater diffusion of information communication technology to society, we must make it more affordable so that people of every class can afford it. This is possible through support from multilateral organisations to the developing nations by assisting them in building their communication infrastructure. Moreover, promoting healthy market competition in Internet provision and reassuring public-private partnerships in building digital infrastructure could increase the affordability of ICT and thus improve access to it. Further, digital divides can also be lessened by bringing greater awareness among citizens about the use of digital technology, which could help decrease information inequality in society. Retail e-commerce sales in India stood at 16.08 billion US dollars in 2016, making it the second-largest online market after China. It is expected to surpass 45 billion USD in 2021. From the above figures, it is evident that most Indians use the Internet for socialising and purchasing. Though the former may be discarded as a leisurely activity, the latter can be an index of economic development since the volume of online trade that is taking place in India, as is evident from the figures above, is indicative of the country's economic robustness. After looking into facts, figures, and statistics, let us revert to the basic question: What role does ICT play in development, and how is the digital divide an impediment in its pursuance?
3.5.1 Role of ICT in Development
You are already aware that the scopes of ICT in Development are numerous and can be summarised in the following points as per a United Nations report- * The ICT sector's output directly contributes to the economy. * Advancement in public administration through ICT in governance by bringing administration closer to people through e-portals of the government departments. In this way, transparency in the procurement process for public service contracts can be ensured, thereby reducing corruptive practices. * ICT can be used to improve education, including distance learning and training. * ICT can be used to improve the delivery of healthcare services, including the application of telemedicine. * ICT can be used to monitor ecological situations and maintain environmental stability.

The benefits of ICT can be used to tackle the problems of poverty, illiteracy, ICT and Digital Divide and universal healthcare, as well as to bring governance closer to people and make it more citizens centric. As said before, a country's transition from a developing to a developed economy is contingent upon the spread and use of ICT in its service industry. An economy evolves in a dialectical fashion. On one hand, it opens up newer opportunities and professions, thereby playing a pivotal role in employment generation; on the other hand, it throws up the complexities of managing and governing vast urban expanses which face a shortage of amenities and services. Consequently, cities today face the problem of urban implosion, whereby the services and basic amenities required are falling short of demand, nullifying the very reason for the migration of people from rural to urban areas. The above problem can be addressed by employing ICT in governance and in the provisioning of services.
3.5.2 ICT and Governance in India
The majority of Indians reside in rural areas. As per the Census 2011, 69% of the population resides in rural areas (in the previous Census, this figure stood at 72%), and 55% of its workforce is in the primary sector. To enhance and sustain the overall prosperity, economic growth and social development in the global competitive regime, the Government of India initiated a National E-Governance Plan (NeGP), which is an initiative of the Government to make all its services available to the citizens of India via electronic media. The rural e-Governance projects implemented in the recent few years have aptly demonstrated the importance of ICT in the areas of rural development that are in question. Some of the schemes introduced in rural India have improved government services immensely. Instances like Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), Online Income
Tax, Online Central Excise, Unique ID (Aadhaar), e- Stamp, E-office, online payment of bills, online booking (of goods and services), e-Choupal, e- Krishi, online FIR etc has not just accelerated the growth of respective areas and contributed to country's economic development, but also brought governance to every doorstep. The ambitious Aadhaar project is linking every citizen digitally and curbing the malpractices of bribery, red-tapism, tax evasion, etc, by bringing more transparency into governance. ICT not only impacts citizen service delivery but also provides the much- needed stimulus to economic growth due to its focus on crucial social and industry sectors. The extensive use of ICT in governance not only provides better citizen service but also enhances the efficiency, transparency, and accountability of various government departments and agencies.
3.6 PREREQUISITES FOR PROPER
FUNCTIONING OF ICT
However, the objectives mentioned above can only be achieved if a proper ICT infrastructure exists in the country. Infrastructure does not imply only the physical infrastructure (the availability of cheap internet services being a prime reason) but the social infrastructure as well, which means the

ICT: Conceptual acceptability, readiness, and digital literacy of the citizens to use ICT to meet Framework the demands of their service. It is here that the digital divide plays a role. With just one-fourth of the population having access to the Internet, the benefits of ICT in governance and development are constrained. The digital divide does not exist merely at the level of availability of ICT, but also (and more importantly) at the level of adaptability and ability to use ICT for furthering one's development and that of the society in particular and the nation as a whole. Thus, there exists a digital divide between people living in urban areas and the ones living in rural areas, between rich and poor, between the young (who are more capable of using ICT for their own needs and desires) and the old generation (who find technology a bit difficult to comprehend). The digital divide also exists between men and women, as data suggests above. Men dominate internet usage in India with 71% compared to 29% of women. Thus, it is evident that the digital divide manifests itself at multiple levels and is not concentrated in a particular section or strata. This digital divide acts as an impediment towards growth and development. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What factors have influenced India's growth in internet usage, and what
challenges persist in bridging the digital gap across different regions and demographics?

2. Explore the role of social media in driving internet access in India. How
has the widespread adoption of social networking platforms contributed to increased connectivity and digital inclusion?

3. Investigate the impact of Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) on commerce and economic development.

3.7 LET US SUM UP
With a global shift towards a service economy, ICT's role in any country's development has become inevitable. It is not just development that also plays an important role in governance. Apart from providing better citizen service, ICT has also ushered in transparency and accountability in government

departments and agencies. It has brought administration closer to people, has ICT and Digital Divide radically transformed the way education used to be imparted, has ushered a revolution in healthcare through telemedicine or medical transcription, improved monitoring of welfare policies, improved management of ecology and maintenance of environmental stability, etc. ICT has no doubt brought about a revolutionary transformation in the economy as well as in the society. However, its benefits cannot be inclusive unless a large digital divide incapacitates three-fourths of the population and puts them outside the domain of ICT. Consequently, if this digital divide is not bridged or addressed on time, it will again give rise to socio-economic disparity, with the disparity not being centred on literacy but on digital literacy.
3.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Aissaoui, N. (2022). The digital divide: a literature review and some
directions for future research in light of COVID-19. Global Knowledge, Memory, and Communication, 71(8/9), 686-708.2. Heeks, R. (2022). Digital inequality beyond the digital divide:
conceptualizing adverse digital incorporation in the global South. Information Technology for Development, 28(4), 688-704. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/02681102.2022.2068492
3. Imran, A. (2023). Why addressing digital inequality should be a priority.
The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries,
89(3), e12255. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/isd2.12255
4. Kuhn, C., Khoo, S. M., Czerniewicz, L., Lilley, W., Bute, S., Crean, A.,
... & MacKenzie, A. (2023). Understanding digital inequality: a theoretical kaleidoscope. Constructing Postdigital Research: Method and Emancipation, 333-373. https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s42438-023-00395-8.pdf
5. Lomborg, S., & Ytre-Arne, B. (2021). Advancing digital disconnection
research: Introduction to the special issue. Convergence, 27(6), 1529- 1535. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/13548565211057518
6. Maceviciute, E., & Wilson, T. D. (2018). Digital means for reducing
digital inequality: Literature review. Informing science: the international journal of an emerging transdiscipline, 21, 269-287.7. Mubarak, F., Suomi, R., & Kantola, S. P. (2020). Confirming the links
between socio-economic variables and digitalization worldwide: the unsettled debate on digital divide. Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in Society, 18(3), 415-430. https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/JICES-02-2019- 0021/full/pdf
8. Rothe, F. F., Van Audenhove, L., & Loisen, J. (2023). Digital
development, inequalities & the Sustainable Development Goals: what does 'Leave No-One Behind' mean for ICT4D? Information Technology for Development, 29(1), 9-26.

ICT: Conceptual 3.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Framework
ANSWER
Check Your Progress 1
1. The Digital Divide refers to the gap between those who have access to
modern information and communication technologies (ICTs) and those who do not, exacerbating social and economic inequalities. Factors contributing to its existence include economic disparities, infrastructure limitations, educational barriers, and socio-cultural factors. Additionally, disparities in digital literacy and skills, as well as issues of affordability and accessibility, play crucial roles. Discrimination based on gender, age, ethnicity, and geographic location further widens the divide, hindering marginalised communities from benefiting from digital advancements.
2. Development encompasses various dimensions beyond economic
growth, including social, environmental, and political aspects. Societal progress and well-being hinge on factors such as healthcare, education, environmental sustainability, equality, and political stability. Quality of life indicators, like life expectancy, education levels, and access to basic amenities, reflect a society's holistic development. Addressing social inequalities, promoting environmental sustainability, ensuring political inclusivity, and fostering cultural preservation are integral to achieving comprehensive development and enhancing overall well-being.
3. The Digital Divide and Development are intricately linked, with access
to digital technologies playing a significant role in socio-economic progress. Bridging the divide can enhance education, healthcare, employment opportunities, and access to information, thereby fostering overall development. Conversely, unequal access to digital resources can exacerbate existing inequalities, hindering socio-economic advancement. Development efforts must prioritise closing the digital gap to ensure inclusive growth and empower marginalised communities. Additionally, digital literacy and skill-building initiatives are essential to maximise the benefits of technology and promote sustainable development. Check Your Progress 2:
1. India's growth in internet usage has been influenced by factors such as
technological advancements, government initiatives, and increased mobile penetration. Initiatives like Digital India aim to expand digital infrastructure and promote digital literacy, driving internet adoption across the country. However, challenges persist in bridging the digital gap, including inadequate infrastructure in rural areas, affordability constraints, linguistic diversity, and disparities in educational attainment. Additionally, cultural barriers and gender disparities contribute to unequal access to technology. Efforts to address these challenges require holistic approaches, including infrastructure development, affordability measures, and targeted interventions to empower marginalised communities. 50 2. Social media has played a pivotal role in driving internet access in India,

facilitating connectivity and digital inclusion. Platforms like Facebook, ICT and Digital Divide Twitter, and Instagram have provided avenues for communication, networking, and information sharing, particularly in rural and underserved communities. Social media's popularity has spurred internet adoption, especially among youth and urban populations. Furthermore, initiatives like Facebook's Free Basics have aimed to provide free access to essential online services, further promoting connectivity. However, challenges such as misinformation, privacy concerns, and digital divides based on socio-economic factors persist. Leveraging social media for digital literacy efforts and community engagement can enhance its role in promoting inclusive connectivity and bridging the digital gap.
3. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has significantly
impacted commerce and economic development, transforming business models, markets, and trade practices. ICT facilitates global connectivity, enabling businesses to reach wider markets, streamline operations, and enhance productivity. E-commerce platforms have revolutionised retail, providing convenience and accessibility to consumers while promoting entrepreneurship and market competitiveness. Moreover, ICT-driven innovations like mobile banking and digital payment systems have expanded financial inclusion, empowering individuals, and businesses. However, challenges such as digital security, infrastructure limitations, and skill gaps need to be addressed to maximise the socio-economic benefits of ICT. Overall, embracing ICT can foster economic growth, create employment opportunities, and drive sustainable development.

I CT: Conceptual UNIT 4 ISSUES OF DIGITAL INEQUALITY
Framework Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Digital Inequality: A Social Problem
4.3 Understanding the Conceptual Development
4.3.1 Shift from Divide to Inequality
4.3.2 Dimensions of Digital Inequality
4.3.3 Concept of Digital Inequality
4.4 Digital Inequality and Contemporary Society
4.4.1 Inequality in the Information Society
4.4.2 Inequality in the Network Society
4.5 Technological Approach to Digital Inequalities
4.5.1 Diffusion of Innovation Theory
4.5.2 Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT)
4.5.3 Resources and Appropriation Theory
4.6 Conceptual Dimensions from a Sociological Perspective
4.6.1 Bourdieusian Approach
4.6.2 Weberian Approach
4.7 Digital Capital
4.8 Digital Inclusion-Exclusion and Participation
4.9 New Forms of Digital Inequality
4.10 Let Us Sum Up
4.11 Keywords
4.12 Further Readings
4.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
The proliferation of information and communications technology (ICT) has given prominence to the digital divide discourse, which has become a subject of global concern. With the rise of new ICTs in the second half of the 1990s, the notion of the digital divide emerged in the policy context to address unequal access to digital technologies. Not all countries have the same ICT penetration or growth rate. Developing countries, particularly in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, often face significant challenges regarding access to digital infrastructure, affordability of digital devices, and availability of digital skills and knowledge. Although it has become hard to imagine life without the Internet and other forms of ICT, only some have the same access to devices such as phones, tablets, laptops, and desktop computers. Thus, the discussion over access to digital technologies has given rise to a debate over their usage from the standpoint of equality.

Simply put, digital inequality results from unequal access, skill, and use of Issues of Digital Inequality the Internet and other ICTs. The conceptual framework for understanding digital inequality deals with the causes and consequences of digital inequality concerning ICTs, considering those as empowerment tools. Several disciplines contribute elements to the framework of digital inequality. Sociology emphasises social inequality regarding access to resources, control over different types of capital, and social involvement. Psychology examines problems as well as attitudes and reasons for using technology. Economics emphasises the spread of relevant innovations. Education deals with digital literacy, skills, and competence. Above all, communication studies deal with the tangents of mediated communication by constructing a connection between elements. Therefore, addressing the concept through the lens of communication studies requires a multi-faceted approach that involves sociological and technological perspectives intertwined with psychological, educational, and economic dimensions. This Unit describes conceptual and theoretical patterns for identifying and understanding digital inequality using socio- and techno-centric accounts. Although only a small amount of theoretical study has been done on digital inequality so far, the Unit sheds light on traditional and emerging concepts and frameworks that revolve around the rise of the digital divide, the manifestation of digital inequality, multiple concepts related to its components, and new forms of digital inequality.
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the multidimensionality of digital inequality; * Explain the nuanced conceptual and theoretical approaches in the field of digital inequality; * Discuss the digital inequality from a Sociological Perspective; and * Understand the technological approach to digital inequality.
4.2 DIGITAL INEQUALITY: A SOCIAL
PROBLEM
Neither the essences of individuals nor the essences of specific collectives or systems (such as capitalism or patriarchy) serve as the starting point for this idea of inequality (van Dijk, 2005). Instead, inequality is based on the connections, relationships, interactions, and transactions between people. Therefore, digital inequality is a societal rather than a technical issue. Access to digital technologies is necessary for participation in many aspects of life, including education, employment, healthcare, and social interaction. Individuals with limited access to digital technologies may find it difficult to fill out online job applications, communicate with potential employers, access online training resources, etc. Digital inequality is a social issue because it creates and expands social inequalities in education, employment, and information access. Those with limited access to digital technologies and

ICT: Conceptual skills may experience significant disadvantages in these areas, affecting their Framework social and economic well-being. Digital inequality can exacerbate other forms of social inequality, such as those based on race, gender, and socioeconomic standing. Those already marginalised in these areas may experience even more difficulty gaining access to and utilising digital technologies, which can exacerbate existing social disparities. As an example, in India, the digital gender gap encourages gender inequity. With internet connectivity, women may be included in employment opportunities, educational opportunities, and social networks, restricting their social mobility and economic desires. Digital inequality is a social concern because it creates and reinforces social inequalities, which can have long-term repercussions for individuals and society.
4.3 UNDERSTANDING THE CONCEPTUAL
DEVELOPMENT
The term "digital divide" was not coined by any theorist; instead, it was first used in an official publication by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA, 1999) in North America. In the earliest accounts of the phenomenon, the "digital divide" meant a disparity in the likelihood of having access to information and communication technologies (ICT) based on demographic characteristics such as race, gender, age, socioeconomic status, level of education, and the composition of the household. As the prevalence of computers and the Internet increased in developed nations, the discourse began to evolve, and more intricate conceptualisations were devised. In a short period, research on the digital divide has gained importance as an academic field; as a result, the concept of the "digital divide" has become more comprehensive with the emergence of "digital inequality".
4.3.1 Shift From Divide to Inequality
The term "digital divide" originally referred to the disparity between people with access to modern technologies and those without access (Van Dijk,
2005) . This definition of the digital divide has been observed in terms of
physical access to telephones, personal computers, cellular devices, etc. Later on, the definition became discordant with understanding the multidimensionality of communication beyond physical access to technologies. Moreover, it has become clear to social scientists that the digital divide is not related to a single binary gap but is intertwined with various social, economic, and technological issues. As social scientists observed the nuances of digital access's social causes and consequences, the term got another social dimension called "inequality". According to this concept, the differences in access and usage of digital technologies are directly or indirectly related to social, cultural, political, and economic inequalities.
4.3.2 Dimensions of Digital Inequality
The digital divide laid the foundation for the concept of digital inequality. To 54 understand the concept of digital inequality, one needs to understand the

levels of the digital divide. Three levels of the digital divide correspond to Issues of Digital Inequality multiple dimensions of digital inequality. Table 1. The three levels of the digital divide
Levels Deals With
First level Binary access to ICTs (have or have not) Second level Digital skills Third level The tangible outcome of digital usage Source: Author's compilation The first level: The first level of the digital divide describes the unequal distribution of access to digital technologies. Low-income persons, those living in rural regions, people with impairments, and members of racial and ethnic minorities are disproportionately impacted by this divide. Second level: The second level of the digital divide refers to the unequal distribution of digital skills and competence among people with access to digital technologies. This divide affects those with access to digital technologies but lack the skills and competence to use them effectively. Individuals from low-income or marginalised communities may lack access to education or training in digital skills, resulting in the second level of the digital divide. Third level: Access to digital devices and acquiring digital skills often fail to predict evenly distributed digital participation (meaningfully participating in the digital sphere). The third level of divide refers to the disparities in abilities to use digital technologies to achieve tangible outcomes of technology usage, such as online learning, remote work, e-commerce, and civic engagement.
4.3.3 Concept of Digital Inequality
The term "digital inequality" reflects a broader conception of the digital divide and incorporates a variety of factors beyond access to technology, including skills, usage patterns, and stakeholders involved in the acquisition of empowerment through technology. It acknowledges that more than merely providing access (binary access to digital technologies) to technology is required to ensure equal benefits from its opportunities. Unequal access to economic, social, cultural, and personal resources impacts digital engagement (Helsper, 2012). Inequality may limit or boost citizens' social, economic, political, personal, and cultural capital, affecting their access to essential knowledge and ability to engage in society (Van Dijk, 2005). A range of determinants contribute to disparities in access to and use digital technologies. Table 2. Determinants of digital inequality Socio-demographic Age, gender, marital status, residency, living area Economic Income, employment status, employment type, occupational status, educational level

ICT: Conceptual Social Online social interaction, social networking, types Framework of social activities Cultural Religion, ethnicity, internet use, language Personal Type of online activity language skills, English skills, cognitive function Material Internet access, access locations, number of electronic devices Motivational Attitude towards ICTs, internet motivation, frequency of internet use, time spent online Source: Adapted from Scheerder, Deursen, & Dijk (2017)
4.4 DIGITAL INEQUALITY AND
CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY
The information and network society context best describes high-tech cultures of particular interest that cater to the digital environment. Scholars, including Manuel Castells and Jan van Dijk, used information and/or network societies to discuss disparities in ICTs. Although developed civilisations often display more information and network society features, discussing these concepts must be addressed in pursuing digital inequality, even in other world sections.
4.4.1 Inequality in Information Society
The idea of an information society broadly describes cultures in which information increasingly serves as both the primary input and output for all processes. Manuel Castells (2011) says that an information society is a social organisation where information creation, processing, and transmission become the primary sources of productivity and power. Knowledge, information, and data continually expand and advance quickly in the information society. Inequality in the information society appears at the most fundamental level of information need, which leads to a widening gap in the capacity for association and knowledge transfer and in the capacity to judge the quality of information and make other related decisions. In modern times, there is a considerable disparity in the distribution of information abilities among different groups of people.
4.4.2 Inequality in the Network Society
The concept of network society is not synonymous with the concept of information society; instead, it is an extension of it. The notion of an information society emphasises the changing nature of activities and processes in modern developed nations. According to Castells (2011), the network society is an informational society in which networks serve as the core organisational structure and pervade all areas. Van Dijk (2006) characterised the network society as an information society shaped by a nervous system of social and media networks. Networks are formed when specific actors select others to join them. As a result, individuals or organisations are either included or removed. Being unable to connect to

these networks entails complete exclusion and digital marginalisation. Issues of Digital Inequality Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the concept of "digital inequality".

2. What are the levels of digital inequality?

3. Mention any three essential determinants of digital inequality.

4. How does inequality affect the information society?

4.5 TECHNOLOGICAL APPROACH TO
DIGITAL INEQUALITIES
Research-based theories and models help us make sense of complex ideas. Digital inequality, an interconnected and complex phenomenon, can be observed through various theoretical frameworks. Over the past decades, several theories regarding the unequal distribution of ICTs have emerged from studying their introduction, diffusion, and use. Theoretical frameworks for comprehending inequalities regarding how people adopt and integrate new technologies to be discussed include the Diffusion of Innovation Theory, the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT), and the Resources and Appropriation Theory (RAT).
4.5.1 Diffusion of Innovation Theory
The diffusion of innovation theory was developed by E.M. Rogers in 1962 to describe how a community of potential customers adopts and spreads an innovation. This theory constructs the pattern by which new ideas, practices or products spread through a population. In this process of innovation and diffusion, diffusion occurs when individuals go through the steps of being aware of the need for an invention, deciding to adopt or reject the innovation, trying out the innovation for the first time, and then using the innovation 57

ICT: Conceptual regularly. Rogers divided adopters into five groups according to how long it Framework took them to decide to adopt. The categories are innovators, early adopters, early majority, late majority, and laggards. Innovators: People willing to take risks are the first to try new ideas. Early adopters: Those eager to test the latest innovations and determine their application for everyone. Early majority: People from the general population who are the first to adopt new technology in the mainstream. Late majority: People from another part of the general population who follow the early majority and start using the new things in their everyday lives. Laggards: People who are slower to adopt new products and ideas. They are risk-averse and inflexible. Each of the five types of adopters is affected by the five primary elements that influence innovation adoption, although to varying degrees: relative advantage, compatibility, complexity, trialability, and observability. Relative advantage is the extent to which an innovation is perceived as superior to the concept, product, or item it replaces. Compatibility is the degree to which the innovation is consistent with the prospective adopters' values, experiences, and requirements. Complexity: The difficulty in comprehending and/or implementing the innovation. Trialability: The extent to which an innovation can be evaluated or experimented with prior to adoption. Observability: The degree to which the innovation yields measurable outcomes. Relevance in the pursuit of digital inequality: The theory may lack some ICT-specific modifications of components, but it is more robust to the diverse and constantly shifting complexities of technologies. Thus, it provides an understanding of the adoption of ICT over time or the diffusion of the Internet.
4.5.2 Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology
(UTAUT)
In 2003, V. Venkatesh, M.G. Morris, G.B. Davis, and F.D. Davis proposed UTAUT by utilising popular models in the field of technology adoption. UTAUT is a popular framework for understanding how people adopt and use new technologies. It suggests that actual technology use is determined by behavioural intent. According to this theory, the perceived likelihood of adopting technology is directly influenced by four critical constructs: performance expectation, effort expectation, social influence, and enabling conditions. Age, gender, experience, and voluntariness moderate the effect of these indicators.

Components of the UTAUT include - Issues of Digital Inequality Performance expectation: This refers to the degree to which individuals perceive that a specific technology will assist them in performing their tasks more effectively or efficiently. Effort expectation refers to the degree to which individuals assume that using a specific technology will be simple and require minimal effort. Social influence: This refers to the extent to which individuals are influenced by the opinions and attitudes of others in their social networks, such as family, friends, and colleagues. Enabling conditions refer to the extent to which individuals have access to the required resources and infrastructure to use a specific technology, such as computers, internet connectivity, and technical support. Relevance in the pursuit of digital inequality: Researchers have used the UTAUT to examine the factors that influence the adoption and use of digital technologies in communities with limited access in the context of the digital divide. Although the UTAUT has been widely used to characterise the digital gap, it and its components have been limited in characterising recent patterns of digital inequality.
4.5.3 Resources and Appropriation Theory
Jan van Dijk (2005) explained the resources and appropriation theory, addressing the social, cultural, and technological factors contributing to digital inequality.
Figure 1. A Casual Model of Core Arguments
Source: Jan van Dijk (2005), The Deepening Divide The core arguments of the theory are as follows: * The unequal distribution of resources results from categorical inequalities in society. * Unequal access to digital technologies results from an unequal distribution of resources. * Unequal access to digital technologies is also influenced by the features associated with the technology. * Unequal participation in society results from unequal access to digital technologies. * Unequal distribution of resources and categorical inequalities are reinforced by unequal participation in society.

ICT: Conceptual The components of the core arguments have been narrated as follows: Framework i) Categorical inequalities: Various personal and positional categories are accountable for the unequal distribution of resources required to access digital technologies. Personal categories comprise individual traits such as age, sex, race, intelligence (cognitive, emotional, and social), and personality (introvert, extrovert, and others). Positional categories include stratifications in the following areas: household (parent-child, husband-wife), management-executive, developing-developed, urban- rural, citizen-migrant, and high-low education. ii) Resources and mechanisms of distribution: An uneven access to digital technologies results from an unequal distribution of resources, where a few mechanisms (social exclusion, exploitation, and control) work throughout the process. The resources identified in theory are temporal (time to spend on different activities in life); material resources (income and all kinds of monetary properties); mental resources (knowledge, social, and technical skills, excluding digital skills); social resources (social network positions and relationships); and cultural resources (cultural status and all kinds of credentials). iii) Successive kinds of access: The fundamentals of resources and appropriation theory explain the stages of digital appropriation, with motivation access being the first, material access being the second, and usage access following after skill access. * Motivational access: Motivation refers to the factors, such as perceived utility and relevance, that influence people's interest in and engagement with digital technologies. Motivations vary from an attitude towards a particular digital medium to financial factors. * Material or physical access: Material or physical access refers to the physical accessibility of digital technologies such as computers and the Internet. Time (whether one has time or not) and places (home, school, public places, etc.) to use digital tools and technologies all come under physical access. * Skills access: Skill access refers to the digital literacy and skills required to effectively utilise digital technologies and the Internet. Skills that account for the usage of digital media encompass operational (the skills needed to operate computers and internet connections), informational (skills used to search, select, and process information from computer and network sources), and strategic (skills to achieve personal or professional goals). * Usage access describes how individuals utilise digital technologies and the Internet, precisely the intensity of usage time and diversity of applications. iv) Properties of ICT (Hardware, Software, and Content): The degree to which a person accesses a particular ICT depends on its technological characteristics. Some of the properties of an ICT tool facilitate access, while others limit it. Complexity and expense limit access, while

multifunctionality and network effects expand it. The formats of new Issues of Digital Inequality media content are an essential characteristic that has a more significant impact on accessibility. v) Fields of participation in society: In many parts of society, access to new media can mean the difference between being included and excluded. The umbrella term for these repercussions is participation in society. People with less exposure to digital media have steadily decreasing opportunities to participate in arenas such as citizenship, education, politics, culture, social interactions, and health care. Relevance in the pursuit of digital inequality: Researchers have used resources and appropriation theory to comprehend digital inequality by analysing the distribution of resources and how individuals and groups appropriate and utilise them in the digital domain.
4.6 CONCEPTUAL DIMENSIONS FROM A
SOCIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
Several traditional social theories serve as a background to the conceptual understanding of sociological approaches to digital inequality that can be used to probe its many facets and depths. Bourdieu's conceptions of capital and Weber's social stratification delve into the humanistic and social influences residing in digital inequality.
4.6.1 Bourdieusian Approach
Bourdieu (1986) defines capital as any resource that gives an individual an advantage that can be accumulated over time. Capital enables agents to replicate their positions within the social field and can take one of three fundamental forms: economic, cultural, or social capital, based on the arena in which it operates. In turn, each person's capital supports social inequality and social hierarchy. The conceptualisation of capital by Bourdieu has laid a foundation for a deeper understanding of digital inequality (Ragnedda & Ruiu, 2020). In other words, people use and invest their social, cultural, and economic assets to strengthen their social status (symbolic capital). The capital of an individual not only creates the first level of the digital divide between those who can and cannot access the Internet but also the second level of the digital divide in terms of skill and capacity to use the Internet and the third level of the digital divide in terms of the social, economic, cultural, political, and personal advantages of being an internet user. Bourdieu introduced the concept of social fields, structured spaces where individuals and groups compete for resources and power. In digital inequality, the digital realm can be considered a social field where individuals' engagement is influenced by their habits--the internalised set of dispositions, behaviours, and preferences shaped by their social and cultural background. Digital inequality through the lens of social fields and habits allows an understanding of how individuals' social positioning and cultural capital influence their access to and use of digital technologies.

ICT: Conceptual 4.6.2 Weberian Approach
Framework The Weberian approach, rooted in the sociological theories of Max Weber, can provide valuable insights into the intertwined processes between social and digital inequalities. Social inequalities as a potential topic of discussion in the discipline of digital inequality have been examined through the lens of Weber's social stratification and power dynamics. The Weberian approach to digital inequality uncovers the structural and systemic factors that contribute to digital inequality and guides efforts to mitigate disparities in access, skills, and resources in the digital realm. Weber emphasised social stratification based on various dimensions, such as class, status, and power. Social stratification illuminates the manifested and circulated uneven distribution of resources. As per the concept, a group of people, being in a privileged position in society, take more advantage of ICTs and put them to use in achieving a tangible outcome (enhancement of life chances), such as job search, purchase, access to health care, political engagement, learning, socialisation, cybersecurity, leisure, and relationships with bureaucracy. As a result, different social groups, such as economically disadvantaged or marginalised communities, experience different levels (high to low) of access and benefits in the digital realm. According to this approach, digital stratification intensifies on the following grounds: Class: A class with limited capacity to use ICTs lacks the economic opportunities they offer. Status group: A status group with limited capacities to use ICTs cannot benefit from usage in status building, enhancement, and improvement. Power: Limited capacities to use ICTs delimit personal interests, political power, and influence.
4.7 DIGITAL CAPITAL
Digital capital is the Bourdieusian approach to the digital realm. Following Bourdieu's concept of capital, digital capital is defined as the accumulation of both digital competence (internal skills and attitudes) and digital devices (external resources). It improves the tangible outcome of digital technologies by turning them into other forms of capital, such as social, economic, and cultural. The core arguments for the concept are as follows: * Digital capital is closely connected with economic, social, and cultural capital. A person needs these three capitals to build a good attitude and the right skills to use technology well. * Digital capital is distributed unequally in society. Individuals with higher traditional forms of capital (such as education and social prestige) tend to have higher levels of digital capital. This indicates that people from more privileged backgrounds are more likely to have the skills, resources, and

social connections necessary to flourish in the digital world. In contrast, Issues of Digital Inequality less privileged people may struggle to access and use digital resources effectively. * People need a network of support (social capital), such as friends, family, and an online community, to build up their digital capital. At the same time, they need money (economic capital) to access ICTs and knowledge, skills, and abilities (cultural capital) to use ICTs effectively.
Figure 2. The Components of the Digital Capital Model
Source: Massimo Ragnedda and Maria Laura Ruiu (2020), Digital Capital: A Bourdieusian Perspective on the Digital Divide. In 2020, Massimo Ragnedda and Maria Laura Ruiu proposed the digital capital model. Digital competence and access are two distinct components of digital capital that can be built up and transferred to improve life chances. According to the concept, in an Internet-based society, digital capital joins the Bourdieusian capitals as an essential factor in illuminating the causes and consequences of social stratification and differentiation. An individual's digital capital can be accessed by cumulating all digital access and competence elements. This model helps comprehend the patterns of digital inequality concerning digital capital resourcefulness. In simple words, it identifies digital capital inequality. The elements of the core components have been described below:
Digital Access
Four elements of digital access: i) Digital equipment: Devices used to access the Internet, such as mobile phones or smartphones, laptops, and desktop computers. ii) Connectivity: Access quality depends on which setting is used to access the Internet. iii) Time spent online: Cumulative experience in using ICTs in terms of total time of internet usage (years of usage)

ICT: Conceptual iv) Support: Seeking help to support experiences related to digital Framework technology Digital competence i) Competence Area 1: Information and Literacy
- The activities of browsing, searching, filtering, data, information,
and digital content
- Evaluating data, information, and digital content
- Managing data, information, and digital content
ii) Competence Area 2: Communication and Collaboration
- Interacting through digital technologies
- Engaging in citizenship
- Sharing and collaborating through digital technologies
- Managing digital identity
iii) Competence Area 3: Digital Content Creation
- Developing, integrating, and re-elaborating digital content
- Knowledge about copyright and licences
- Programming
iv) Competence Area 4: Safety
- Protecting devices, personal data and privacy
- Protecting health and well-being and the environment
v) Competence area 5: Problem-solving
- Solving technical problems, identifying needs and technological
responses
- Identifying digital competence gaps
4.8 DIGITAL INCLUSION - EXCLUSION AND
PARTICIPATION
Digital inclusion refers to the efforts and initiatives aimed at ensuring that all individuals, regardless of socioeconomic background, geographic location, age, gender, or ability, have equal access to and opportunity to use digital technologies effectively. Digital inclusion efforts may involve: * Increasing internet access * Bridging the digital skills gap * Access to digital devices * Creating digital content * Addressing affordability * Empowering marginalised communities * Policy and regulatory interventions Digital exclusion is when individuals or groups are systematically excluded from accessing and utilising digital technologies and resources, resulting in a

lack of participation in the digital world. Issues of Digital Inequality The digital participation of individuals assures the digital inclusion of an individual and, on a larger scale, a specific group or community. In this context, participatory inequality, which may be defined as people's inability to use the Internet to produce and disseminate digital resources, is a potential barrier to the growth of a network society. Table 3. Areas of participatory inequality
Area Inequality
Economic participation Inequalities regarding the usage of ICTs to participate in the labour market and business Educational Inequalities regarding educational usage of ICTs participation Social participation Inequality in the field of social capital building (e.g., building social networks) Cultural participation Inequality related to online cultural practices Political participation Inequality over the Online political discourse Institutional Inequality in achieving digital citizenship participation Source: Adapted from Jan van Dijk (2005) To eradicate digital exclusion, stakeholders (governments, organisations, and local groups) must work together. Efforts to close the digital gap include building internet infrastructure, making devices and connections more affordable, providing digital skills training and literacy programmes, and creating digital platforms open to all users and meeting their needs. These actions aim to ensure that everyone has the same chance to access and benefit from the digital world.
4.9 NEW FORMS OF DIGITAL INEQUALITY
The rapid advancement of technology has resulted in the emergence of new types of digital inequality, discussed as follows: Privacy and digital inequality: Privacy concerns are more important than ever in the digital age. Those with more information, resources, and technological skills can protect their data by implementing privacy-enhancing methods and practices. On the other hand, people with little access to resources or digital literacy may be more at risk of privacy violations, data exploitation, or data hacking, which can increase inequality. Algorithms and digital inequality: Everything from search engine results to automated decision-making systems depends heavily on algorithms. Internet users consciously or unconsciously deal with unseen infrastructure called algorithms, logical rules, and technical prescriptions developed by programmers, mathematicians, and data engineers. Algorithms are essential for creating favourable conditions for participation in digital life; therefore, digital inequality arises from a lack of understanding of algorithms. Lack of awareness could negatively affect democracy and public involvement on a

ICT: Conceptual societal level. Framework Artificial intelligence (AI) and digital inequality: Automation and other emerging technologies like artificial intelligence (AI) have the potential to produce new types of inequality. Access to and proficiency with these technologies can lead to increased productivity, better career possibilities, and financial gains. However, those people and communities that do not have the digital literacy to adapt to these disruptive technologies may be excluded from these advantages, which would increase inequality. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Explain the Weberian approach to digital inequality.

2. What are the core arguments of "Resources and Appropriation Theory"?

3. Write the definition of digital inclusion.

4. What are the two components of the digital capital model?

4.10 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we gained a comprehensive understanding of digital inequality. It explained the factors contributing to inequality, such as disparities in access to technology, internet connectivity, digital skills, and usage factors. Delving into diverse frameworks of digital inequality, it defined the patterns and manifestations of digital inequality across different dimensions of academic disciplines. It also sheds light on how digital disparities intersect with age, gender, race, ethnicity, income, geographical location, and unequal access to digital resources and skills, affecting opportunities, outcomes, and possibilities to ensure equitable and secure digital environments. We learnt that the challenges faced by digital exclusion contribute to broader social and economic inequalities. We also explored new inequalities such as privacy, algorithmic, and AI-related inequalities. The discussion provided a deep understanding of the concept, offered diverse perspectives, and equipped you

with knowledge and insights from a technological and sociological Issues of Digital Inequality perspective of digital inequality.
4.11 KEYWORDS
Internet inequality: Internet inequality refers to the differences between people, communities, and nations regarding their capacity to access and efficiently use the Internet. Digital inclusion refers to the inclusion of individuals and communities in the digital world. This means that they have access to digital technologies, internet connectivity, and the necessary skills to use them effectively, thus gaining access to the economic, social, and cultural benefits of the digital world. ICT: Information and communication technology (ICT) comprises diverse hardware, software, networks, and digital systems that process, store, transmit, and retrieve data and information. Digital participation is the active engagement, involvement, and inclusion of individuals and communities in the digital world through digital technologies. These technologies allow them to access information, communicate, create, collaborate, and contribute to digital content and platforms. AI: Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to emulating human intelligence in machines programmed to carry out tasks that typically require human intelligence. It allows machines to perceive, reason, learn, and solve problems, enabling them to imitate or replicate human cognitive abilities.
4.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. G. Richardson (Ed.),
Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education (pp. 241-258). New York, NY: Greenwood.
2. Castells, M. (2011). The Rise of the Network Society. Germany: Wiley.
3. Helsper, E. J. (2012). A corresponding fields model for the links between
social and digital exclusion. Communication theory, 22(4), 403-426.4. Ragnedda, M., & Ruiu, M. L. (2020). Digital capital: A Bourdieusian
perspective on the digital divide. Emerald Group Publishing.
5. Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of Innovations, (1st Ed.). United
Kingdom: Free Press.
6. Scheerder, A., Van Deursen, A., & Van Dijk, J. (2017). Determinants of
Internet skills use and outcomes. A systematic review of the second-and third-level digital divide. Telematics and informatics, 34(8), 1607-1624.7. Van Dijk, J. A. (2005). The Deepening Divide: Inequality in the
Information Society. United States: SAGE Publications.
8. Van Dijk, J. A. (2006). The network society. (2nd ed.). London: SAGE
Publications.
9. Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User
acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 425-478.

ICT: Conceptual 4.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Framework
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The term "digital inequality" reflects a broader conception of the digital
divide and incorporates a variety of factors beyond access to technology, including skills, usage patterns, and stakeholders involved. It acknowledges that merely providing access (binary access to digital technologies) to technology is insufficient to ensure equal benefits from the opportunities it provides.
2. Three levels of the digital divide correspond to multiple dimensions of
digital inequality. The first level of the digital divide describes the unequal distribution of access to digital technologies. The second level of the digital divide refers to the unequal distribution of digital skills and competence among people with access to digital technologies. The third level of divide refers to the disparities in individuals' abilities to use digital technologies to achieve tangible outcomes of technology usage.
3. Determinants of digital inequality include economic determinants -
income, employment status, employment type, occupational status, and educational level; social determinants - online social interaction, social networking, types of social activities; cultural determinants - religion, ethnicity, and internet use language.
4. Inequality in the information society appears at the most fundamental
level of information need, leading to a widening gap in the capacity for association and knowledge transfer, the capacity to judge the quality of information and other information-related decisions. In modern times, there is a considerable disparity in the distribution of information abilities among different groups of people. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Social inequalities as a potential topic of discussion in digital inequality
have been examined through Weber's social stratification and power dynamics. The Weberian approach uncovers the structural and systemic factors contributing to digital inequality and guides efforts to mitigate disparities in access, skills, and resources in the digital realm.
2. Core arguments of the Resources and Appropriation Theory are (i)
Unequal distribution of resources results from categorical inequalities in society. (ii) Unequal access to digital technologies results from an unequal distribution of resources. (iii) Their features also influence unequal access to digital technologies. (iv) Unequal social participation results from unequal access to digital technologies.
3. Digital inclusion refers to the efforts and initiatives to ensure that all
individuals, regardless of socioeconomic background, geographic location, age, gender, or ability, have equal access to and opportunity to use digital technologies effectively.
4. Digital competence and access are two distinct components of digital
capital that can be built up and transferred to improve life chances.

Issues of Digital
Inequality Block
ICT FOR DEVELOPMENT
UNIT 5
ICT for Poverty Reduction
UNIT 6
ICT for Economic Development
UNIT 7
ICT for Rural Development
UNIT 8
ICT for Environment Sustainability

I CT: Conceptual BLOCK 2 INTRODUCTION: ICT FOR
Framework
DEVELOPMENT
After going through the conceptual frameworks of ICT and the challenges of digital inequalities, this Block takes you through the real scenarios and ground realities in select sectors. Four sectors where ICT has the potential to make substantial differences - poverty reduction, economic development, rural development and environmental sustainability. This Block contextualises the role of ICTs in these specific sectors, which are the main components of developing countries.
Unit 5: ICT in Poverty Reduction. In this Unit, we explore the impact of
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) on alleviating poverty. We scrutinise the connections between ICTs and poverty reduction, assessing their strengths and weaknesses in tackling this global challenge. This Unit also aims to reunite how ICTs offer avenues for equitable development, particularly in rural areas.
Unit 6: ICTs for Economic Development. In this Unit, we will Discuss the
role of Information Communication Technology (ICT) in fostering economic progress. We will explore how ICT shapes economic landscapes, from foundational concepts to historical milestones. We will uncover how digital technologies drive growth and productivity through case studies and analyses. Additionally, we'll examine the transformative power of e- governance and the burgeoning realm of ICT entrepreneurship. This Unit gives a broader global perspective on ICT's dynamic impact on economic development.
Unit 7: ICT and Rural Development. We will understand the role of
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in fostering rural development. It's essential to grasp the significance of ICT in the broader context of national progress. This Unit aims to unite the intricate ways ICT can revolutionise rural landscapes. We can catalyse development, bridge existing gaps, and propel progress by infusing technology into these areas. Throughout our discussions, we'll examine the vast potential of ICT in rural development while dissecting the challenges that governments and stakeholders may encounter.
Unit 8: ICT and Environment Sustainability. This Unit will Discuss the
intricate relationship between Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and environmental sustainability. From understanding ICT's life cycle impact on the environment to exploring the pillars of sustainable development, we will explore key concepts like Green ICT, smart cities, energy efficiency, and e-waste management. This unit teaches you how integrating ICT can pave the way for a greener, more sustainable future. The backbone of any developing country is that it strengthens the core economic activities through which every section of society reaps relevant benefits. How ICT plays a role in this process is the core discussion point of this Block.

UNIT 5 ICT IN POVERTY REDUCTION ICT in Poverty
Reduction Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.3 Connections between ICTs and Poverty Reduction
5.4 Scope of ICTs in Poverty Reduction
5.5 ICT Approach in Poverty Reduction: Strengths and Weaknesses
5.5.1 Strengths of ICT as a tool for poverty eradication
5.5.2 Weaknesses of ICT as a tool for poverty eradication
5.6 Let Us Sum Up
5.7 Further Readings
5.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
ICT plays an important role in every sector of development be it health or agriculture. So far in the previous three Units we have studied how ICT can benefit the poor and marginalised and improve their socio-economic conditions contributing to the overall development process of the nation. This Unit will look into the possible effects and implications of ICT in poverty reduction. How effective ICT is in alleviating poverty, which is a major problem of the developing world. At the same time, we have to accept that the developing nations are increasingly utilising ICTs today yet the evidence on the usefulness of ICTs in the process of development is rather limited. In the last Unit of ICT and its impact on rural development, we have illustrated through case studies and evidence that access to ICTs in rural areas can help in the improvement of health as well as increase income opportunities amongst the underprivileged. In that Unit, we have also noted how ICTs can offer scopes of equitable development in rural areas through timely and updated information on relevant issues. We have noticed in the previous Units that ICT can strengthen and enhance the efforts for development supported with the right policies combined with holistic approaches. Access to ICTs can really make a significant difference in the process of development and in this Unit, we will be learning what reasonable role ICT has to play in poverty reduction. One of the most significant questions that this Unit will try to investigate is that whether factors like economic growth globalisation along with ICT can diminish poverty. It is also to be seen here that whether the approach of technology as a solution to poverty reduction considers the social structures that basically define access to new media and its influences.
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to:

ICT for * Understand the scope of Information and Communication Technologies Development in poverty reduction; * Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of ICT approaches in poverty reduction; * Analyse the strengths and weaknesses of ICT as a tool for poverty reduction.
5.2 CONNECTIONS BETWEEN ICTS AND
POVERTY REDUCTION
Here the central question is whether ICT remains side-lined in the broader outlook of financial and social notions of poverty. Now before we proceed to illustrate the scopes and possibilities of ICT in reduction of poverty, we need to understand what the dimensions of poverty are. Is economic growth or equal income opportunities enough for eradication of poverty or for development of the basic resources for the poor people? With the existing social inequality, can the marginalised people have access to the benefits of the expanded economic activities? Further, how do we anticipate that poor people who do not have access to basic education can take advantage of employment opportunities created by globalisation or economic growth? Defining poverty is complex. It is basically a condition that generates from gross discrimination in the ownership of assets and hence can be said as a mixture of socio- economic problems. Biased conditions in the market competition or potential benefits of economic growth, it is quite likely that the disadvantaged people will remain outside of such unequal market coalitions generally favouring the affluent. We will be elaborating this point in the following paragraphs. As we mentioned earlier poor people also have to deal with issues like lack of essential assets and nil access to information and government services. So, in the backdrop of these issues, this Unit will try to highlight how ICT can enable government assistance and policies to reach the poor people. If we recollect, we learnt in all the previous three Units that communication forms the basis of the development process. The scope of ICT in eradication of poverty by initiating sustainable development is huge and it is a topic of central debate across the world. ICTs possess enormous power of starting the information flow and empowering deprived people. As in the previous paragraph we observed that the poor people not only lack the basic resources, but they also are deprived of the access to information and hence are easily vulnerable to disparities. They lack political perceptibility and remain voiceless, and ICT can help in improving their livelihoods to a great extent by providing them the knowledge and skills and information about income opportunities, their rights, government policies, etc. It is important as lack of transparency can make the government unresponsive and unequal access to information can also lead to corruption and increasing discrimination. In developing countries, socio-structural inhibitions to economic growth are comparatively higher and weaken the ability of larger society to respond to the needs of the deprived.

In the Unit where we discussed the role of ICT in rural development, we have ICT in Poverty Reduction noticed three points where ICT can improve to be useful and these were increased agricultural productivity, improved access to market and massive business opportunities. Now, these opportunities offered by ICT to marginalised people in rural areas leads to possibilities of reduced inequality. Although the educational and knowledge skill levels of the poor people are usually too low, yet ICT manufacturing sector can offer scopes of employment. What is unfortunate is that the information and communication needs of the poor people remain mostly unaddressed. Considering the disadvantaged position the poorer people have to deal with a number of challenges for their daily existence and that they are left with little time to assert their privileges to government schemes and services. The ill-informed attitude combined with an ineffective voice of the poor perpetuates an indifferent government and the needs of the underprivileged remain ignored as there is no one to pressurise the authority to be responsive towards their needs. Further, the experiences and knowledge of the marginalised are mostly underestimated. In this context, it is believed that in places where access to information is widespread, government offices are more likely to be efficient in defending the interests of the poor.
5.3 SCOPE OF ICTS IN POVERTY REDUCTION
What we found common is that there is a strong correlation in the role of ICT in rural development and in poverty reduction. It is a good sign that most of the developing nations are making efforts to incorporate ICT in its development schemes. Grameen Bank of Bangladesh is one such example where initiatives have been taken for realising the ICT benefits in the economic growth of the rural sector. The increasing demand for ICT based services in developing countries is extensive and for meeting these on-going demands can be met by enabling an environment with effective regulatory mechanisms. Social science scholars are of the opinion that ICT can be used for increasing market access and efficient e-commerce sectors paving the way for local artisans or farmers to trade their products directly to the consumers bypassing the middlemen. It is quite possible that poor people remain unaware of their rights and basic entitlements, a proper communication and knowledge system can effectively articulate their interests in learning about the same and taking steps towards fulfilling their needs and extension services. ICT has the potential to change and refresh old occupations by adding new dimensions to it and the government should make full use of it. One example can be by enabling all post offices of the country to be also used as mobile centres for reaching out to maximum people. People need access centres from where they can use the services of ICT. If a poorer section of the society cannot afford a personal mobile, then such telecom centres can come to the aid. Poor people can have market prices and related information through such extension services offered by the ICT tools. With the help of mobile phones, a poor villager can call someone living in a distant place and have updated information about anything associated with their livelihood like health, agriculture, or employment. ICT helps in opening the limited boundaries of the deprived

ICT for people. The more exposure they have about the larger world, the more they Development become aware of their condition which in turn becomes an opportunity for asserting their basic rights. People of rural areas can have information about possible work prospects in urban areas, minimum wages, etc. We have an idea that people from rural areas migrate to urban areas for employment and such prior information can avert the chances of exploitation. From the above discussions we gather that a constant change is occurring in the field of information and communication technology. In this context a distinction should be made particularly of the sectors of ICT usage i.e. Direct use and indirect use of ICT for poverty reduction. The first being the category where ICT applications are vastly used though the process of digitization. This first category includes the amalgamation of ICT into any existing activity which it can either enhance or possibly alter as well; it can make the task easier or improve the quality and reduce the usage cost significantly. E- governance, e-health, e-learning are some of the examples of this first category. However, the direct usage of ICTs like computers and internet by the underprivileged and poor people is rather more restricted. Secondly, the other category is where ICT use can generate some new activities which did not exist beforehand. Computer training, manufacturing of computer software, selling of computer or mobile related services falls under the second category. It basically implies creation of new revenue generating options. This distinction is relevant as it clearly specifies that the scopes and impacts are different between the direct and indirect use of ICT. We draw out these following relations between ICT and poverty reduction - * Technology has the scope of impacting the lives of the poor but with time the poorer sections are also becoming active users of ICT themselves influencing the direct impact. * ICTs can be used in many ways for improving the socio-economic conditions of the poor and has a direct link with economic growth. * ICT use by the government for the development of the poor comes under the broader development context. * The impact of ICT is different when used in terms of economic improvement and social improvement. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How do Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs)
contribute to addressing poverty, and what factors influence their effectiveness in doing so?

2. What are the necessities of understanding ICTs in the context of poverty ICT in Poverty
Reduction reduction, and how do they contribute to understanding the role of technology in socio-economic development?

3. What role do social structures play in shaping access to ICTs and their
benefits for poverty reduction, and how can these barriers be addressed?

5.4 ICT APPROACH IN POVERTY REDUCTION:
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
So far, we observed that the critical component of eradication of poverty is increasing information and communication flow. But an important question that arises here is does improving information flow sufficient to eradicate poverty? What we can state here from the above observations is that communication flow is a necessity, but it may not be a sufficient condition for development of the poor. For instance, a rural farmer who may have information access about the current market price for his products, but he still may be unable to get his share of profit because of the existing unequal power relations or he might not be able to deliver the goods on time because of poor road infrastructure. These are all challenges that hinder the process of development and hence initiatives from all sectors must be taken by the government. In one of the above sections, we talked about the multi-dimensional concept of poverty. Now turning to this point again, if we try to understand it in simple economic terms then poverty eradication is directly associated with increase in daily income. But poverty reduction is more than solving the economic issue. An enhanced livelihood with equal health, information, education, and skills combined with the freedom to voice their opinions and have complete power over their own lives also constitute the eradication of poverty. So far, this Unit has mainly focused on the positive influences of ICT on the lives of the deprived people in terms of economy and livelihood. There are several ways through which ICTs are enabling rural productivity. It is a hard- core truth that in a rural context ICTs are not able to provide much employment scopes or direct revenue benefits. We need to understand that ICT itself is not like any other labour-intensive manufacturing sector creating substantial employment for the rural masses. So, for an overall analysis of the effect of ICT in poverty reduction, its impact in terms of productivity in agriculture or other rural economic activities needed to be evaluated.

ICT for 5.4.1 Strengths of ICT as a Tool for Poverty Eradication Development The potential influence of ICT in eradication of poverty can be found at micro, intermediate and macro levels. We will be discussing all these three levels in the following paragraphs and with small examples to give you a clear idea. ICT use at the micro level means the poor have access to ICT and are used directly by them for addressing their needs right from economy to opinion expression. ICTs allow improved business efficiency and global connectivity with a lower cost of information. The point about the impact of ICTs on agricultural productivity implies that access to productive resources is required for being able to employ the increased information and knowledge. For example, one can have information about weather conditions, but it is only applicable to those who have the land resources and not to those who sell their labour power. So, there is a downside of ICT that it is not applicable everywhere. Yet, this one aspect does not limit the scopes of ICT in the upliftment of the marginalised people. In the Unit where we discussed the role of ICT in health development, we observed that it is not necessary that every individual need to have access to ICT for development of personal health; rather if one community health centre has access to ICTs then it can benefit the larger group. So, here in this case, every rural farmer might not have access to ICT and might not know how to use it, so agricultural extension agents can come to the rescue of farmers informing them about global knowledge of crops, irrigation, pesticides, etc. relevant for improving their productivity. Through ICTs, the local government can get information about the requirements of the poorest and communicate such needs to the concerned levels of the government. In rural areas, teachers can get exposed to newer ways of teaching and learning materials and share the ideas with the needy children. These are all examples of ICT impact in the intermediate level benefiting those who do not have direct or personal access. Lastly, macro level ICTs help civil society groups or the non-government agencies to mobilise and address the needs of the poor and share with similar agencies working elsewhere. It will collectively help in developing a bigger movement with shared information and strategies leading to transparent markets, governance, and innovation of social and economic reforms for the poor people. So, what we learnt from the above points is that no matter in what level or in what ways ICTs are used, it eventually helps in the development of the marginalised section and promoting rural finance. Most of the attention while discussing ICT in combating poverty is restricted to new media technologies and the Internet. However, the full range of ICTs is beyond that with Radio and Television being important information tools. In fact, these two tools are much more widespread, and ICT enhances their role as drivers of poverty reduction and fostering social development.
5.4.2 Weaknesses of ICT as a Tool for Poverty Eradication
We are aware that ICT is undoubtedly a valuable tool of creating awareness and sharing of updated information yet there are limitations and inhibitions in the implementation of ICT to combat poverty. Considering the present

scenario, it can be said that there exists an inequality in the reach of ICT ICT in Poverty Reduction tools. The risk remains with the rich having greater access to ICTs and knowledge economy and the poorest remaining excluded of all such benefits. Such digital divide may perpetuate the already existing discrepancies in finance, skills, privileges, and other sectors of social growth. To reduce the disparities the technologies must be deployed where information is made possible to the poor, make their voices heard effectively and make the functioning of government transparent. Poor and less educated or illiterate people especially women might find it comparatively difficult or might face constraints in using ICTs. Rural areas are also characterised by gender discrimination and women in such areas might not be able to pay for accessing ICT tools as they lack funds and may not have any control over the household income or expenditure. Hence, what we see here is that ICTs have limitations, and it is useful to those who have the access and knows to make full use of it. Despite all these weaknesses, ICTs offer scopes of information availability and several remedial approaches for meeting the challenges and needs of the poor. Promoting the access of ICT among the poor in far off areas would require the initiatives by the government and its allied partners. It is unfortunate that because of the economic and technical weaknesses the rural marginalised people are the last to have access to the ICT infrastructures and services in a developing country. What is understood from these two statements is that the role of making ICT a vital tool for empowering the poor and eradication of poverty is to be addressed by the government and concerned authorities. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How can the strengths and weaknesses of ICT approaches in poverty
reduction be assessed, and what implications do they have for policymakers and development practitioners?

2. How can the scope of Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs) be understood in the broader context of development, and what opportunities do they offer for addressing poverty?

77

ICT for 3. What are the implications of relying on technology as a solution to Development poverty reduction, and how can holistic approaches be adopted to address underlying inequalities?

5.5 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we conceptualised poverty through the parameters of economic growth, improved livelihood, and knowledge skills. We learnt that poverty is a complex situation which is characterised by lack of basic essential assets. Poor people also suffer from unhygienic living conditions, poor resources, low income, and discrimination. This Unit gave an overview of different perspectives of ICT in poverty reduction starting from economic and noneconomic to direct and indirect use and how in every sector it is related to the upliftment of the poor people. Economic growth is considered as one of the main parameters of poverty reduction. We also learnt the two main categories of ICT application in relevance to poverty eradication. So, this Unit basically summarises the strengths and weaknesses of ICT approach in poverty reduction. We also had an idea that the question of digital divide also needs to be addressed for the wider development of the community as rural areas are prevalent with low educational levels and landlessness. Lastly, creating information rich environments through ICT not only means that availability of information but also assures that the voices of the poor are heard. So, this Unit discussed understandings of poverty and the welfare of the marginalised people from the viewpoint of grassroots local level and not from the international development perceptions.
5.6 FURTHER READINGS
1. Afzal, A., Firdousi, S. F., Waqar, A., & Awais, M. (2022). The influence of
Internet penetration on poverty and income inequality. Sage Open, 12(3), 21582440221116104. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/21582440221116104
2. Khuhawar, K. H., Jianqiu, Z., Farkhunda, S., & Ye, Y. (2014). Crush the poverty
by information and communication technology. Population, 3(4), 250-256.3. Lechman, E., & Popowska, M. (2022). Harnessing digital technologies for
poverty reduction. Evidence for low-income and lower-middle income countries. Telecommunications Policy, 46(6), 102313.4. May, J., & Diga, K. (2015). Progress towards resolving the measurement link
between ICT and poverty reduction. Impact of information society research in the global south, 83-104. https://library.oapen.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12657/28057/1/1001937.pdf
5. Rizqulloh, M. I., & Firmansyah, M. F. (2021). The effect of information and
communication technology on poverty reduction. International Journal of Engineering, Science, and Information Technology, 1(3), 92-97. https://ijesty.org/index.php/ijesty/article/download/116/94 https://mostwiedzy.pl/pl/publication/download/1/harnessing-digital-technologies- for-poverty-reduction-evidence-for-low-income-and-lower-middle- 78 incom_67572.pdf

6. Ruhyana, N. F., & Essa, W. Y. (2020). Opportunities of using information and ICT in Poverty
communication technology in reducing poverty. JEJAK: Jurnal Ekonomi Dan Reduction Kebijakan, 13(2), 319-331. https://journal.unnes.ac.id/nju/jejak/article/download/25036/10796
7. YILMAZ, R., & KOYUNCU, J. Y. (2018). The contribution of ICT to poverty
reduction: panel data evidence. Sosyal Bilimler Arastirma Dergisi, 7(4), 63-75.5. 5 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1
1. ICTs contribute to poverty reduction by providing access to information,
enhancing communication, and empowering marginalised communities. However, their effectiveness is influenced by factors such as infrastructure availability, affordability, digital literacy, and socio- economic context. Addressing these factors requires investment in infrastructure development, promotion of digital literacy programs, and implementation of policies to ensure affordability and inclusivity. Maximising the impact of ICTs on poverty reduction necessitates holistic approaches that consider the diverse needs and challenges faced by marginalised populations. By addressing these barriers, ICTs can play a significant role in bridging the digital divide and promoting socio- economic development.
2. The main learning outcomes of studying ICTs in the context of poverty
reduction include understanding the scope of ICTs in poverty reduction, evaluating their strengths and weaknesses, and analysing their effectiveness as tools for poverty alleviation. These outcomes contribute to understanding the role of technology in socio-economic development by providing insights into how ICTs can empower marginalised communities, improve access to resources, and facilitate inclusive growth. By critically assessing the potential benefits and limitations of ICT approaches, policymakers and development practitioners can design more effective strategies to address poverty and promote sustainable development.
3. Social structures significantly influence access to ICTs and their benefits
for poverty reduction, including factors such as infrastructure development, digital literacy, and affordability. These barriers can be addressed through targeted interventions such as infrastructure investment, digital skills training, and policy initiatives to promote affordability and accessibility. By adopting a holistic approach that considers the broader socio-economic context and underlying inequalities, policymakers can create an enabling environment for ICT adoption and maximise their impact on poverty alleviation. This requires collaboration between government, civil society, and the private sector to ensure that ICT initiatives are inclusive and address the diverse needs of marginalised populations. Check Your Progress 2
1. Assessing the strengths and weaknesses of ICT approaches in poverty 79

ICT for reduction involves understanding their capacity to provide access to Development information, enhance communication, and empower marginalised communities. Strengths include increased access to resources and services, while weaknesses may include limited infrastructure and digital literacy barriers. Policymakers and development practitioners must consider these factors when designing interventions to ensure they address the specific needs and challenges of the target population. By acknowledging both the benefits and limitations of ICTs, policymakers can develop more comprehensive and effective poverty reduction strategies that promote inclusive development and address underlying inequalities.
2. Understanding the scope of ICTs involves recognizing their potential
contributions to poverty reduction, including opportunities for income generation, skill development, and access to essential information. Leveraging these opportunities requires investment in infrastructure, promotion of digital literacy, and adoption of policies that promote inclusivity and affordability. By harnessing the transformative power of ICTs, policymakers can create new avenues for economic growth and social development, ultimately reducing poverty and promoting sustainable development. However, realising the full potential of ICTs requires addressing underlying barriers such as digital inequality and ensuring that benefits are equitably distributed across society.
3. Relying solely on technology as a solution to poverty reduction may
overlook underlying inequalities and power dynamics that limit access to ICTs and their benefits for marginalised communities. Holistic approaches that consider social structures, policy frameworks, and community engagement are essential for addressing these challenges and promoting inclusive development. This requires collaboration between government, civil society, and the private sector to design interventions that address the root causes of poverty and promote sustainable development. By adopting a comprehensive approach that considers the diverse needs and perspectives of marginalised populations, policymakers can ensure that ICT initiatives contribute to poverty reduction and promote equitable access to opportunities for all.

UNIT 6 ICTs FOR ECONOMIC ICTs for Economic
Development
DEVELOPMENT
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 Introduction to ICT and Economic Development
6.2.1 Foundational Concepts of ICT and its Role in Shaping Economic Landscapes
6.3 The Economic Impact of Digital Technologies
6.3.1 Digital Technologies Influence Economic Growth and Productivity
6.3.2 Case Studies on Successful Integration of ICT in Various Industries
6.4 E-Governance and Economic Transformation
6.4.1 Role of ICT in Transforming Governance Structures for Economic Advancement
6.4.2 Global Best Practices in e-Governance and Their Impact on Economies
6.5 ICT Entrepreneurship and Start-up Ecosystems
6.5.1 ICT Role in the Rise of Entrepreneurship
6.6.2 Digital Start-up Ecosystem.
6.6 Global Perspectives on ICT and Economic Development
6.6.1 Comparing and Contrasting International Approaches to Leveraging ICT for
Economic Growth
6.6.2 Global Interconnectedness of Digital Economies
6.7 Let Us Sum Up
6.8 Keywords
6.9 Further Readings
6.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
6.0 INTRODUCTION
You must know the benefits of information communication technology (ICT) in our daily lives. ICT is making our lives quite comfortable and providing us with opportunities. At the same time, ICT is helping our economy progress. This Unit examines the role of ICT in bringing about economic development. There are also discussions on how e-governance is bringing about economic transformation. We will also discuss ICT entrepreneurship, the digital start- up ecosystems and the standpoint of global bodies and countries on the transforming role of ICT in the economic system.
6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you will be able to: * Understand the core concepts of ICT and key milestones in the development of ICT; * Explain the role of ICT in bringing economic development;

ICT for * Understand the impact of e-governance on economic transformation; Development * Explain the digital start-up and its ecosystem and * Discuss the global standpoint on ICT and economic development.
6.2 INTRODUCTION TO ICT AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
Economic development refers to a process in which an economy grows, and overall development happens among the country's citizens. The economic development of a country depends on various factors. Among them, technology is considered an important factor that contributes to the development process of a nation. In the late twentieth century, the revolution seen in the Information Communication Technology (ICT) sector helped many economies, especially India, to go up the ladder of economic development. ICT includes both information and communication technology that helps to process information. By creating huge job opportunities, the ICT sector is directly contributing to the growth of a nation. The service industry is directly helping the economy to develop by exporting software and other services. There is a direct link between ICT and economic development within an economy. It has also been recognised for quite a long time. The trade reforms during the 1990s brought accolades for India as the fastest- growing economy during 2000 and afterwards. For this, the knowledge- driven ICT sector has played a crucial role. The global village concept, as coined by Marshall McLuhan, has become a reality with the growth of the ICT sector. Liberalisation and globalisation have fuelled the growth of the ICT sector globally. The increasing adoption of ICT in various other sectors pushes for economic growth in India. The ICT sector currently contributes more than 13% of India's GDP. According to NASSCOM, the technology industry has grown from $ 220 billion in revenue in 2020 to $ 227 billion in
2021. All these data show that the revenue generated from the ICT sector
directly contributes to the development of the Indian economy. In developing economies, an appropriate ICT infrastructure, including internet usage and hardware and software deployment through innovation, brings economic development.
6.2.1 Foundational Concepts of ICT and its Role in Shaping
Economic Landscapes. Information is power. It is an organised, meaningful, and useful interpretation of data. Data and information can be used interchangeably. This data may be text, sound, images, visuals, etc. It is the news that the information seeker wants and that is passed on either orally or written. But now, with the invention of technology, information is passed on to the receiver with the help of technology. The basic concept of ICT revolves around three important elements: information, communication, and technology. The introduction of the desktop computer was the first step that led to the invention of ICT. Later, the invention of the Internet and mobile technologies added fuel to the development process of ICT worldwide. ICT is an umbrella term that includes hardware, software, and internet technologies. These

technologies are helping people to communicate and share information ICTs for Economic Development digitally within a fraction of the time. The invention of the telephone, computer and Internet has changed how people communicate earlier. The technology uses computers, networking equipment, software, and the Internet to store, process, retrieve and protect information. The term ICT is an extension of the term IT (Information Technology). The integration of communication technology such as audio-visual broadcasting and telecommunication equipment along with the Internet helps users to store, process, access, transmit and manipulate information as and when required. The communication term in ICT refers to the communication of information or data through the use of the Internet in electronic form. The technology used in the present era is digital technology. This digital technology helps people to communicate information digitally throughout the globe. The three main components of ICT are computers, communication networks, and digital technology, which ensure the smooth transmission of data. Computers are electronic devices that can be given instructions to process, store and publish data to the user. We need hardware, software programs, data, or information to run a computer. Next comes the communication network, which includes networking devices and the Internet to transmit and receive data. Connectivity and wireless technology are the most significant contributors to the development of advanced networking. Mobile and wireless communication devices have changed the ICT landscape. Electronic media devices also play an important role in managing information. You must be aware of the various benefits of ICT. The application of ICT is seen in every field, be it in science, technology, communication, business, entertainment, and many others. It not only improves our lives but also helps the economy to grow across the globe. E-commerce, E-banking, E- governance, and E-learning are some areas where ICT has been applied. In the initial development phase, ICT has a limited role in shaping the economic landscape. Rather, the process was very slow. Later, investment in infrastructure and innovations in this area has impacted the economic landscapes of different countries. ICT has catalysed economic development in developing countries in the past decades. Looking back 20 years, the situation has changed dramatically due to various technological innovations. Big corporations have taken interest and invested crores of rupees in this sector. The ICT sector includes hardware, software, applications, content, network, telephony, service support, and others through their business, contributing major revenue to the economy. This sector has proven itself as the foundation for every other sector in the business enterprise segment. ICT has brought economic growth at every level by providing necessary information, solutions, immediate connections, enhanced production, and access to global and virtual geographical markets. Organisations using ICT tools are seeing faster growth, which eventually shapes the economic growth of a nation. It facilitates economic growth by impacting a nation's GDP (Gross Domestic Product). ICT, including hardware, software, telecommunications, and electronic equipment manufacturers, is leading economic growth. Various research studies have also found that high internet penetration and technological deployments have

ICT for directly impacted the economic development of nations. The following are a Development few benefits of ICT that have helped to shape the economic landscape towards the growth and development of various nations, especially India. * Faster Connectivity: Digital technology has helped businesses overcome many problems with connectivity. It has wiped out the distance barrier, thus assisting organisations in facilitating information, expanding their product markets, facilitating monetary transactions through wire transfers, communicating through email, voice, and video calling, etc. It improves people's access to information and communication habits. * Employment generation: ICT is creating job opportunities for the unemployed. We have a huge talent pool of educated youth with highly skilled and semi-skilled knowledge. ICT deployment in business houses also creates IT-related jobs for younger job seekers. In return, it helps organisations allocate workers efficiently and maintain transparency in the employment markets. * Global Investment: Due to advanced technology deployment and huge technical experts, multinational companies in the telecommunication, electronic equipment, hardware, and software sectors are investing crores of rupees. This directly impacts the foreign direct investment scenario of a nation. * Increase in Efficiency: We can see the increase in efficiency of the working population with high-speed Internet, broadband connectivity, the increasing speed of computing, and the application of various ICT- related technologies. Even government organisations in low-income and developing countries have realised the importance of ICT and have started investing in digital infrastructure through e-governance, e- banking, and others. * Growth of Social Capital: To achieve economic growth, a nation must develop its social capital. Innovations in digital technology are directly impacting this development. The availability of social media platforms, along with cheap data, has been helping people connect globally. If society functions properly, the nation will develop; we need a strong social capital base. ICT helps the social capital base develop and contributes positively to economic growth. These are some of the positive impacts of digital technologies on a nation's economic scenario. Applying ICT also creates knowledge cities, increases agricultural produce exports, promotes digital innovation, reduces consumer and business transportation costs, etc. Therefore, there is a positive correlation between ICT and economic growth. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.

1. Point out the benefits of ICT that contribute to the economic growth of a ICTs for Economic
Development nation.

6.3 THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF DIGITAL
TECHNOLOGIES
Digital technology mainly comprises the Internet, automation of different sectors, artificial intelligence, 5G, and others that are playing a leading role in the economic growth process of a nation. Adopting digital technologies in various sectors creates employment opportunities, increases exports, and produces high-quality industrial products. The ICT sector also helps the industrial sector reduce its cost of operation, assists back-office support, enhances workforce efficiency, and many other ways. The GDP rate can measure whether an economy is progressing or not. The higher the GDP rate of a nation, the higher the economy of that country progresses. The dynamic ICT sector is positively impacting the economy. According to NASSCOM, the revenue from the Indian technology industry is estimated to cross $245 billion, an additional $19 billion over last year. This amount can be an explicit eye-opener for all of us to realise the contribution the ICT sector is making to the Indian economy.
6.3.1 Digital Technologies Influence Economic Growth And
Productivity. Economic growth in a country is realised only when the size of that country's economy increases over a period. Economic growth is achieved when the total production of goods and services increases compared to the last year. Several sectors contribute mainly to economic growth. Only during 1990- 2000 was the ICT sector recognised as an essential sector that played a leading role in shaping the economic condition of a few nations, especially India. The software industry in India, with its highly skilled labour, has been able to attract foreign investments and generate foreign currency. India is now considered an economic powerhouse because of its continuously rising GDP growth rate. The manufacturing sector, especially the electronics and telecommunication industries, has a dominant share of the government's total revenue earnings. As of 2023, India's GDP rate is more than 7%, and the government is optimistic about achieving more than 8% in the coming financial year. The high rate of broadband penetration also has a direct effect on the GDP growth rate. The growth of e-commerce platforms such as Amazon, Flipkart, Zomato, JioMart and others have influenced the Indian economy. The introduction of online payment applications and systems has further pushed the economy ahead. Digital automation is the most important advantage of digital technology. This automation has saved a lot of working hours. These workers can utilise

ICT for their free time for more productive work. Various offerings of public services Development through online platforms and mobile applications have increased the productivity of the common masses. The digitalisation of banking, government, manufacturing, and other sectors has positively impacted productivity. Seamless communication and access to the latest technology and digital tools have increased productivity across the sectors. The declining cost of data charges, high-speed Internet and low-cost computing, the advantage of the time difference, etc., have added fuel for economic growth.
6.3.2 Case Studies on Successful Integration of ICT in
Various Industries. The integration of ICT in various industries has increased workers' efficiency and productivity and eased access to goods, services, information, etc. It has also opened the doors for businesses to access global markets. Digital technologies have been integrated into banking, manufacturing, governance, agriculture, roads and transport, and other sectors. Let us discuss a few successful case studies on applying ICT tools in various sectors that helped to grow the Indian economy.
1) The Gyandoot Case Study: It was a government-to-citizen initiative
taken by the Madhya Pradesh (MP) to provide services regarding agricultural produce pricing, marketing, other citizen services like application and issuing of income certificates, domicile certificates, caste certificates, public grievance redressal, etc. This project was implemented in Dhar district in 2000. In this project, the MP government developed an intranet system to run a web portal through which the common citizen can access information with the help of ICT tools. The project was also aimed to connect citizens with the local administration. This project has contributed to the development of human beings and, hence, the economy.
2) e-Choupal.com: This is another initiative the business conglomerate
ITC Limited took to connect farmers directly with the corporates for selling their produce. The company's agri-business segment is an exporter of agricultural products. They can get the actual benefits by connecting the farmers directly with the company without any interference from the middlemen. The integration of ICT has helped connect the farm directly to the factory. This has helped the farmers to handle challenges such as fragmented farms and weak infrastructure, such as the absence of cold storage. This initiative has helped to increase rural income through higher productivity and high-quality produce, and hence, there is a demand for higher industrial goods. This demand will directly impact the economy.
6.4 E-GOVERNANCE AND ECONOMIC
TRANSFORMATION
As per a survey report published by the United Nations in 2022, a positive relationship was found between the income level of a country and its E- Government Development Index (EGDI) value. Denmark, Finland, the

Republic of Korea, New Zealand, and Sweden are some countries doing good ICTs for Economic Development in the e-governance sector. The ICT tools are helping governments across the globe to deliver public services efficiently and transparently. The system has much accountability and is now considered the most reliable platform for connecting with citizens. With electronic governance, citizens are asked to participate actively in the administrative process, and less corruption is found in the system. These initiatives help small business houses to be part of the economic system and contribute to the nation's income generation process. E- governance projects have the potential to contribute both directly and indirectly to the economic transformation of a nation. Active citizen participation and efficient e-governance initiatives can contribute towards economic development through proper information channels, transparent administrative systems, less processing time, less travel time, reduced cost, etc. The role of e-governance in India is an important driver in achieving the concept of a digital economy. In India, the first e-governance project was started in e-learning in Kerala.
6.4.1 Role of ICT in Transforming Governance Structures
for Economic Advancement. In the present era, technology is helping us to transform governance by making governments of different countries more transparent, efficient, effective, and responsive. ICT plays a leading role in the implementation of e-governance projects. Digital technology in e-governance initiatives can improve the government information management system. It empowers citizens with easy access to information and government services, optimises business collaborations, etc. Some of the initiatives taken by the government of India in this area are Aadhaar, Digi-Locker, Mobile Seva, online tax filing and payment and many other services. Under the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) launched in 2015, the Indian government has moved from mere computerising government departments to providing citizen-centric services. Implementing digital technology in various government departments has helped the citizens pay fees and taxes directly, contributing to the nation's exchequer. The Government e-marketplace project has benefited business houses in e-auctioning, e-bidding, comparing prices, searching for better business options and other e-commerce options. The Government of India has launched the Digital India programme to empower citizens digitally as part of the e-governance project. Several research studies have also been done on the contribution of solid e- governance initiatives towards the economic growth of various nations. An increase in the e-governance index will positively impact the GDP rate. Another essential element in fuelling economic advancement is the reduction of corruption practices. Various online web portals providing citizen services have been key in tackling corruption. Though it has not been able to be rooted out of the administrative and bureaucratic system, to some extent, the scale has been reduced. This also translates into the economic advancement of a nation. Let us take an example of income tax e-filing. Online income tax filing has various benefits for taxpayers and the government. It provides an easy and convenient way to file and secure transactions, less administrative burden for the government, no involvement of middlemen, swift transfer of 87

ICT for funds to the government exchequer, etc. Therefore, the ICT tools have Development positively impacted various governance structures through a more competitive business environment, easy access to information, better methods of record keeping, etc.
6.4.2 Global Best Practices in E-governance and Their
Impact on Economies
Both the World Bank and the United Nations are stressing the use of digital technologies in delivering services to citizens to bring transparency, a faster communication process and a corruption-free state. Most countries are now practising e-governance in their operations. The USA has taken the initiative to use IT in government systems to reduce paperwork, increase response time, etc., from 2001 onwards. Around the same time, the New Zealand government has also set up an e-government unit to integrate ICT into the governmental system. The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Welfare (UNDESA) surveys the member nations on their performance and progress in e-governance initiatives from time to time.
(UN Report on E-Governance Development Index)
Let us discuss some of the best practices that have fared well and positively impacted the country's economic growth. India's 12-digit AADHAAR card system has been a landmark offering for its citizens. This system has facilitated identity verification, easy service delivery, increased the common man's financial inclusion, reduced fraud, and higher social benefits. An increase in the common man's financial inclusion directly impacts a nation's economy. Norway's Altinn Platform is another best practice in e-governance initiatives to discuss. The Norwegian government has developed a one-stop website to facilitate direct interaction between businesses and all government agencies. The government also occasionally publishes all kinds of regulatory information required for businesses. This system has been able to increase the productivity of the business houses, enhance the regulatory compliance system, lessen the burden on the government machinery, etc. The National Job Bank of Canada is one such initiative where young people aged 15-30 can search for job opportunities across Canada. The Canadian government

has installed multiple kiosks across the nation which are connected to the ICTs for Economic Development Internet. Youths can search for career information, programmes, services, etc. These are directly related to the employment generation segment of its economic advancement. The Malaysian government felt the requirement for a robust ICT infrastructure long ago. Its poor telecommunication infrastructure was a deterrent to the development of the economy. The government has invested much in the basic telecommunication infrastructure by recognising its weaknesses. ICT tools were then integrated into government systems, and many e-commerce initiatives were considered. MyBiz is a website developed for small and medium business houses by the government to facilitate their business requirements and to reach global customers, helping businesses with collaborative marketing and creating a conducive environment for industries with the help of electronic governance initiatives. Other countries like Sweden, the Republic of Korea, and New Zealand are also doing well. Their excellent digital strategic policy has helped them achieve economic growth. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Briefly explain the role of e-governance in economic transformation.

6.5 ICT ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND START-UP
ECOSYSTEMS
According to Nobel Peace Prize winner and microfinance pioneer Muhammad Yunus, all human beings are entrepreneurs. Anyone can be an entrepreneur now. Flexible enterprise policy, along with the advancement of technology and transformation in the business environment, has given many young talents the thought to choose entrepreneurship over highly paid jobs. The growing digital technology market has attracted people to venture into this segment. According to statista.com, the global ICT market is expected to reach six trillion dollars in 2023. Young entrepreneurs with proactiveness, innovativeness and risk-taking capability are entering the ICT business with new concepts. Entrepreneurs are looking to do business with upcoming technologies such as artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things, cloud computing, digital products, and others, which have enormous potential in the future. Digital transformation has opened various opportunities and challenges for us. Entrepreneurs are starting companies to develop a product or service in the ICT sector. These new companies are known as start-ups and are in the initial operation phase. They are separate from other enterprises due to their

ICT for capability to take high risks and use innovative and agile methods Start-up Development companies, people, funding organisations, government, support organisations and others form the start-up ecosystems Mentors, investors, advisors, and facilitators are also part of the start-up ecosystem Apart from this, money, time, and skilled workers are also components of the ecosystem An interesting subject of this ecosystem is that the partners are not likely to be operating from the same place They may be located in different parts of the world but are working for the same start-up venture capitalists, crowdfunding, and other grant or loan-providing agencies are the sources of investment for start-ups.
6.5.1 ICT Role in The Rise of Entrepreneurship
Though there are several reasons behind the rise of entrepreneurship, the ICT ecosystem has increased the number of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship plays a leading role in bringing growth to a nation. An entrepreneur must be able to take risks, innovate, be determined, and look for new opportunities. After the invention and integration of ICT in the business ecosystem, there has been a rise in the number of entrepreneurs going digital, which is the new mantra for businesses to succeed. ICT can expand economic opportunities by providing better process efficiencies and facilitating the information needs of entrepreneurs. It is the critical enabler for a business house to do business effectively. The application of ICT in the financial and education sectors has significantly benefited many entrepreneurs in earning profit. This has attracted others to join the bandwagon. Entrepreneurs are now finding new ways to deal with customers after ICT integration into their business processes They can track their customer's orders, respond quickly to their queries and retain customers in a much easier way Along with this, sales, marketing, production, and consumption processes also offer much more flexible operations after the integration of ICT into the central infrastructure of every business the ease of doing business by sitting in a remote place and expanding your business globally has encouraged many people Government policies in different countries are now introducing digital entrepreneurship action plans to bring youngsters into the entrepreneurship forum The greater penetration of the Internet, along with ICT tools, has reduced the cost of communication and, hence, created cooperation among large and small businesses Therefore, small businesses with limited resources depend on big firms for collaboration on innovation The use of digital technology in various government processes has also simplified the process of business registration and licensing, facilitating training for professionals applying for grants, etc.
6.5.2 Digital Start-up Ecosystem
Digital start-ups are now considered an essential element in a country's economic system They are the companies working in the digital technology areas and are innovative high-tech companies They prefer to work on a low scale at first with low investment and low cost Later, with various innovative business models, they expand to reach global markets digital transformation has brought a new generation of entrepreneurs in the digital technology

segment These start-ups not only generate employment opportunities but ICTs for Economic Development also contribute to the country's economic growth various stakeholders in a digital start-up ecosystem They are start-up companies, mentors, investors, academia, government, incubators, support organisations and others They are interdependent and include communities, organisations, resources, service providers, etc They work in collaboration with each other to help start-up companies progress as a system Various factors, such as the marketing environment, financial climate, innovations, and the skills of various persons control digital start-up ecosystems. The digital start-up ecosystem must function under specific policies, practices, protocols, etc. These start-ups are doing business in different areas of upcoming technologies such as artificial intelligence, virtual reality, augmented reality, Internet of Things, mobile applications, digital devices and many other advanced areas of digital technology as per the data available on the Indian government's start-up website, India had the third-largest start- up ecosystem in the world in 2018 out of 50,000 start-ups, more than 9000 start-ups are operating in the technology space The Indian government has started a new initiative called 'Start-up India' to encourage young talents to be part of the start-up culture and build an ecosystem for entrepreneurs to do their business smoothly in 2015 some of the digital start-up companies operating in India are Paytm, Boat, Razorpay, Unacdemy, CRED, etc. corporate connect and government support are the two catalysts that helped to grow the start-up ecosystem in India.
6.6 GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES ON ICT AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Countries around the world have already realised the integration of technology with various platforms is essential for sustainable economic development Numerous studies have been done on this subject, too, which have also established a direct relationship between ICT usage and economic development united Nations is optimistic about the contribution of ICT to

ICT for achieve all the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) international Development Telecommunication Union (ITU), which plays a dominant role in upgrading the ICT infrastructure of developing countries through various initiatives t provides support to developing countries for making ICT tools affordable for all most of the global bodies think that the benefits of ICT integration and ICT for all are realised only in developed countries As per the Digital Development Review page of the World Bank website, about one-third of the global population remain offline in 2023 t was also found that in the ICT segment, usage of the Internet, mobile phones, and broadband penetration has a direct impact on the economic development of a nation There is still a digital divide in some developing and low-income countries. The European Union has drafted policy guidelines under the Digital Education Action Plan (2021-2027) for integrating ICT tools into digital education ecosystems. According to the European Commission, the development of ICT is essential for Europe to remain ahead in the digital economy. Has already realised the importance of ICT for economic growth, and therefore, over 20 billion euros from the European Regional Development Fund has been available for ICT investment from 2014 to 2020 after realising the role of ICT in economic development, UAE's Digital Economy Strategy has planned to double the contribution of the digital economy to 20% of GDP by 2031 he government has taken strong steps to digitalise the private and public sectors to boost its economy he Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, in an article, has opined that the ICT sector, through its exports, has helped to drive the economy upward and counter inflation along with job creation.
6.6.1 Comparing and Contrasting International Approaches
to Leveraging ICT for Economic Growth. Among various determinants of economic growth in the present era, ICT is considered one of the most important of all any empirical studies have been done on the positive contribution of ICT towards economic growth in various advanced economies Some developed countries, like the USA, Japan, the UK, etc., have already leveraged ICT to achieve economic growth Some developing countries like India and China have started the integration of digital technologies in various segments to attain economic growth However, there are also some underdeveloped countries where we are seeing a wide gap in accessing digital technology Differences were found in getting a return on investment in ICT in different countries World Bank, in its various reports on ICT, has expressed that digital technology should reduce information barriers, increase productivity through automation and bring innovations through building knowledge societies since 2007, the World Bank has started supporting countries in increasing internet penetration, providing high-speed broadband through investment in telecommunication and mobile infrastructure Many people in Asia and the Pacific, the Arab region and African countries still need to be connected to the Internet There is also a gap found between men and women in accessing digital services like accessing the Internet, e-banking services, usage of smartphones, etc.

India, as a developing country, has been able to attract investment from both ICTs for Economic Development foreign and domestic investors in the ICT sector; therefore, the ICT sector has been able to generate employment opportunities and thus contribute to the GDP in this digital era, e-commerce is one of the significant revenue generators The China is the largest e-commerce market in the world - commerce is earning a whopping revenue of 925 billion US dollars consumers are getting a rich online shopping experience with the use of smartphones on social media platforms such as Instagram, Facebook and others have also created opportunities for the seller community most of the countries have made their mark on integrating ICT in the education sector Covid-19 restrictions have compelled some governments to think of boosting ICT infrastructure in their respective countries to meet health emergencies, countries like India have upgraded the data management systems to connect the government with health care providers and the public The government in the USA is still spending around 70% of its ICT budget on upgrading to new technology developing countries are now adopting cloud computing to manage their IT resources his technology comes to rescue the government in managing its exponentially growing data hen Russia attacked Ukraine in 2022; the Ukrainian government suddenly secured its civil service provisions through cloud computing.
6.6.2 Global Interconnectedness of Digital Economies
As per the survey report of UNDESA 2022, the global digital economy is growing faster than the global GDP; it is expected to reach $25 trillion within the next 5-6 years The backbone of the digital economy emphasises interconnectedness among people, machines, the Internet and organisations digital data, digital technology and infrastructure are the three pillars of the digital economy the new trend and policies practised by various countries in their e-governance approach will raise their respective digital economies frontier technologies, such as AI, IoT, VR, cloud computing, etc., will drive economic growth he COVID-19 and other challenges have compelled world leaders to think in a collaborative way to face difficult situations mobile applications developed for transferring money have benefitted people residing in rural areas where banking operations were a distant dream Internet Governance Forum is a platform created for multiple stakeholders from different countries to collaborate and share knowledge on a global scale World Bank has started working with partners like ITU on policy formulations it has also worked with African countries to finance ICT infrastructure. There should be a proper policy guideline to introduce digital economy integration among nations, e. Many countries see a digital divide due to ICT infrastructure's non-availability or poor availability. It is a difficult task to bring them into the purview of the digital economy to bring these countries into the global digital economy scenario; the developed countries, along with the UN and ITU, must guide and support the digital transformation process. The giants Microsoft, Google, Facebook and others have played essential roles in building ICT infrastructure in less developed countries to provide a wide range of ICT services due to interconnected global economic activities. Our economies are interconnected through digital transformation through 93

ICT for digital data, technology, and infrastructure, which will help achieve global Development interconnectedness in the digital economy. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Write a brief note on the digital start-up ecosystem in India.

2. Name four frontier technologies that are in the limelight throughout the
globe.

6.7 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we have discussed various elements of ICT and its role in bringing economic development and growth. We have also learned about the role of e-governance in a nation's economic transformation process. We have also discussed the digital start-up ecosystem and its economic contribution. Finally, we analysed discussions on global perspectives on ICT and the digital economy.
6.8 KEYWORDS
Entrepreneurship: The entrepreneur's ability to do business by taking risks to earn profit. Economic growth is the development within an economy in a specified period, i.e., a year. Digital economy: This is an economy in which digital technology plays a vital role in connecting people, organisations, data, businesses, etc.
6.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Adam, I. O. (2020). ICT development, e-government development, and
economic development. Does institutional quality matter? Information Technologies & International Development, 16, 19. https://itidjournal. org/index.php/itid/article/download/1745/1745-5478-2-PB.pdf
2. Adeleye, B. N., Adedoyin, F., & Nathaniel, S. (2021). The criticality of
ICT-trade nexus on economic and inclusive growth. Information Technology for Development, 27(2), 293-313. https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/34868/3/Final%20Manuscript_ICT- Trade%20Nexus%20on%20Economic%20Growth%2C%20Africa.pdf

3. Avgerou, C. (2003). The link between ICT and economic growth in the ICTs for Economic
Development discourse of development. In Organizational Information Systems in the Context of Globalization: IFIP TC8 & TC9/WG8.2 & WG9.4 Working
Conference on Information Systems Perspectives and Challenges in the
Context of Globalization June 15-17, 2003, Athens, Greece (pp. 373-
386) . Springer US. https://eprints.lse.ac.uk/2575/1/
The_link_between_ICT_and_economic_growth_in_the_discourse_of_de velopment_%28LSERO%29.pdf
4. Bilan, Y., Mishchuk, H., Samoliuk, N., & Grishnova, O. (2019). ICT and
economic growth: Links and possibilities of engaging. Intellectual Economics, 13(1), 93-104. https://www3.mruni.eu/ojs/intellectual- economics/article/download/5066/4597
5. Eggleston, K., Jensen, R., & Zeckhauser, R. (2002). Information and
communication technologies, markets, and economic development. The
Global Information Technology Report 2001-2002: Readiness for the
Networked World. https://livernspleen.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12 /readiness-for-the-networked-world.pdf#page=78
6. Maiti, D., Castellacci, F., & Melchior, A. (2020). Digitalisation and
development: Issues for India and beyond (pp. 3-29). Springer Singapore. https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-981-13- 9996-1_1.pdf
7. Niebel, T. (2018). ICT and economic growth-Comparing developing,
emerging and developed countries. World Development, 104, 197-211. https://madoc.bib.uni-mannheim.de/37488/1/dp14117.pdf
8. Palvia, P., Baqir, N., & Nemati, H. (2018). ICT for socio-economic
development: A citizens' perspective. Information & Management, 55(2), 160-176. https://libres.uncg.edu/ir/uncg/f/P_Palvia_ICT_2018.pdf
9. Pradhan, R. P., Arvin, M. B., Nair, M. S., Hall, J. H., & Bennett, S. E.
(2021). Sustainable economic development in India: The dynamics between financial inclusion, ICT development, and economic growth. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 169, 120758. https://repository.up.ac.za/bitstream/handle/2263/88122/Pradhan_Sustain able_2021.pdf?sequence=1
10. Sarangi, A. K., & Pradhan, R. P. (2020). ICT infrastructure and
economic growth: A critical assessment and some policy implications. Decision, 47(4), 363-383. References:
1. Department for International Trade. (n.d.). India - Information and
Communication Technology (ICT). Retrieved from https://www.trade. gov/country-commercial-guides/india-information-and-communication- technology
2. Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2022). Information and
Communication Technologies (ICTs). Retrieved from https://www.un.org/development/desa/socialperspectiveondevelopment/i ssues/information-and-communication-technologies-icts.html

ICT for 3. European Commission. (n.d.). Information and Communication Development Technologies (ICT). Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/ policy/themes/ict_en
4. International Monetary Fund. (2023). How the IT Sector Powers the US
Economy. Retrieved from https://itif.org/publications/2022/09/19/how- the-it-sector-powers-the-us-economy/
5. National Association of Software and Service Companies. (n.d.).
Technology Sector India 2023: Strategic Review. Retrieved from https://nasscom.in/knowledge-center/publications/technology-sector- india-2023-strategic- review#:~:text=In%20FY2023%2C%20India's%20technology%20indust ry,%2419%20Bn%20over%20last%20year
6. Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. (2003). E-
Readiness: Vision 2003. Retrieved from https://www.meity.gov.in/ writereaddata/files/eready2003/CHAPTER3_32-57.pdf
7. United Nations. (n.d.). Information and Communication Technologies
(ICTs). Retrieved from https://www.un.org/development/desa/ socialperspectiveondevelopment/issues/information-and-communication- technologies-icts.html
8. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2022).
Chapter 1: ICT and Sustainable Development. Retrieved from
https://desapublications.un.org/sites/default/files/publications/2022- 09/Chapter%201.pdf
9. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2022).
Chapter 5: ICT for Inclusive Development. Retrieved from
https://desapublications.un.org/sites/default/files/publications/2022- 09/Chapter%205.pdf
10. World Bank. (n.d.). Digital Development. Retrieved from
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/digitaldevelopment/overview#:~:tex t=The%20World%20Bank%20provides%20knowledge,the%20ongoing %20Digital%20Development%20revolution
6.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The four benefits of ICT that contribute to economic growth are faster
connectivity, employment generation, global investment, increased efficiency, and the development of social capital. Check Your Progress: 2
1. E-governance plays an important role in a nation's economic
transformation. Efficient e-governance initiatives can contribute to economic development through proper information channels, transparent administrative systems, less processing time, less travel time, and reduced costs.

Check Your Progress: 3 ICTs for Economic
Development
1. India has the third-largest start-up ecosystem in the world. 2018, out of
50,000 start-ups, over 9000 were operating in the technology space. The Indian government has started a new initiative called 'Start-up India' to encourage young talents to join the start-up culture and build an ecosystem for entrepreneurs to do their business smoothly.
2. Four frontier technologies are artificial intelligence, virtual reality, the
Internet of Things, and cloud computing.

I CT for UNIT 7 ICT AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Development Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 Rural Development
7.3 ICT and Rural Development: Growth and Opportunity
7.3.1 Possible Ways of Implementing ICT for Rural Growth
7.3.2 ICT Projects in Rural India: Case Studies
7.3.4 Challenges
7.3.5 Ways of Overcoming the ICT Challenges
7.4 Let Us Sum Up
7.5 Further Readings
7.6 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
This Unit will discuss the role of ICT in rural development. In the previous two Units, you have learnt about the role of ICT in the overall development of any nation and about its segregated role in the development of the health sector. Now, one standard question that comes up is why we are discussing the role of ICT in individual sectors when we have thoroughly discussed the role of ICT in the overall development of a nation. It is important because the developments in individual sectors contribute to overall development, and hence, we need to understand the role of ICT in such individual contributing sectors. We know that Information and Communication Technology can play a very prominent role in strengthening the development of rural areas. But the question is how? An infusion of ICT in rural areas can speed up the development process and help fill the gaps in the existing systems or projects meant for such areas. Prospects for the application of ICT in rural development are immense, but it is also true that the government will face some challenges, which we noticed in the previous two Units. This article focuses on the scope of ICT in rural development and the opportunities and challenges. In this Unit, we will particularly illustrate the role of ICT in enabling various development goals and the benefits of ICT in optimising the quality of life of people residing in rural areas.
7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the role of ICT in rural development; * Evaluate the potential applications of ICT in rural development; and * Analyse the challenges and propose solutions for integrating ICT for rural development.

7.2 RURAL DEVELOPMENT ICT and Rural
Development Before we approach the idea of ICT and rural development, as well as its scopes and possibilities, we need to understand what rural development means. We will be discussing the concept of rural development in short here. The concept of rural development is multidimensional and multifaceted; thus, the challenges of rural areas are multi-layered. To be defined more accurately, rural development is an approach that enables marginalised poor rural people to gain what they rightfully deserve and need for themselves. It is a strategy that helps the poorest seek a proper livelihood, including small- scale tenants, farmers and the landless. So, the transformation of rural areas is fundamental to improving people's livelihoods. Since agriculture is the basis of rural livelihoods in a developing nation like India, it is particularly vital to look for connections between agriculture and ICTs. In rural development, one thread is closely associated with the other. For instance, rural poverty reduction is directly related to increased agricultural productivity. A lack of basic amenities and infrastructure and low literacy levels mainly characterise rural areas. Rural development comprises strategies that focus on better livelihood for people with provisions for access to basic infrastructure and facilities. India is still considered a developing nation after so many years of independence. The question here is whether the government or public administration has been able to respond effectively to the changing requirements of the present twentieth century. In this context, the use and application of ICT is seen as a paradigm shift from traditional approaches to the execution of government strategies. As the meaning suggests, ICT has enabled the rendering of government policies and services to the public using electronic means. Recent innovations in ICT have strengthened broad-based development. We can elaborate on this point by examining the experiences that we notice in and around us every day. ICT can help create scopes for social and economic empowerment for marginalised people. It can help the poor overcome powerlessness despite inequities in traditional assets like educational opportunities, finance, or land, etc. The scope of direct information and communication can transform the business relationships of poor producers who can directly quote their deserved demands. ICT advancements can also help promote government responsiveness towards rural areas and marginalised people as connectivity through the Internet, telephones, televisions, and the radio enables the voices of the excluded to be heard. In India, telephone lines have reached rural interior areas by introducing public call offices (PCOs), so it can be assumed that people with low incomes will indeed have minimal access to ICT. In rural areas, people are mostly isolated from the ongoing information revolution. Several studies on ICT for rural development help us gain a proper perspective on the various aspects of the subject, such as social exclusion or the digital divide. Evaluating the developmental impact of ICT applications on rural areas can be seen through e-governance. Through Amartya Sen's capability approach, human development can be conceptualised, which sees development as freedom. This concept is even more significant in rural areas where people do not have 99

ICT for access to many basic amenities of life. Development in this context would Development mean more opportunities to live free from poverty, political subjugation, and disparities. The capabilities or the capacity to use ICT is seen as freedom and is very relevant in rural areas. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How does the integration of Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) contribute to the development of rural areas?

2. What is the key understanding of the role of ICT in rural development?
How do these outcomes contribute to your understanding of technology's impact on societal progress?

3. Discuss the significance of understanding the role of ICT in individual
sectors, such as rural development.

7.3 ICT AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT:
GROWTH AND OPPORTUNITY
Developing countries worldwide are attempting to use ICTs to achieve developmental goals, and India has also attempted to harness ICTs for development. In the first Unit, where we discussed the scopes of ICT in the development process, we learnt that ICT applications can add efficiency to the existing socio-economic, political, and governmental spheres. In rural areas, poverty is one of the major areas with multiple dimensions. Being poor does not mean lacking basic resources; in other words, a lack of ICTs can also lead to poverty. So, to make the rural areas developed, the rural farmers with access to information must be brought out of poverty. It is inevitable that through the use of ICTs, rural people can voice their problems and communicate better. Moreover, access to ICTs can equip the people of rural

areas with skills that can help improve their overall well-being. ICT can help ICT and Rural Development them gain skills through various sources, including the Internet and mobile phones. Agriculture is one of the main activities in the Indian rural scenario, and the functionality of ICT in this sector is one of the major contexts in rural development. In our country, most of the population resides in rural areas and suffers from many problems like food insecurity, poverty, low income, poor educational facilities, etc. The income generated from agriculture is usually low because of several factors. As agriculture is the major source of income and employment in rural areas, it must be seen how ICT can improve rural livelihoods by improving the prospects of agriculture. In the following sections, we will be discussing the scopes of ICT in rural areas. We have mentioned earlier that agriculture plays a vital role in rural areas' social and economic growth. Agricultural informatics is a new concept that has evolved due to the development of ICTs. Let us illustrate this point a little more. Agriculture is significant because improved agricultural production can not only provide food security to rural communities but can also decrease the problem of poverty. Scholars agree that to reduce poverty, the focus should be on the transformation of the agricultural sector. Besides labour productivity, access to major remunerative markets and land use, as well as increased ICT use, can also directly influence issues of agriculture and food security at the rural and national levels. From an economic viewpoint, the integration of ICTs in the existing development strategies for agriculture has a prospective of increased access to markets nearby or across the country for proper selling and remuneration of agricultural produce. It can thereby benefit the rural economy and other associated growth. On the other hand, the absence of ICTs can lead to inappropriate market information and huge losses in agricultural production. Timely information can also alleviate the cause of low productivity in agriculture. It was one aspect of rural development that we have touched on through ICT. Now, we will be looking at the other expected outcomes of ICT. We know that rural development is an integrated concept of growth, and the basic infrastructures, like health, education, and food, constitute the rural development programmes. Communication can solve major social problems and iniquities. We will discuss how ICT can touch upon the other aspects of rural development. The introduction of communication through ICT can be used to improve education, social awareness, nutrition, health, and hygiene. Developing countries worldwide have initiated the implementation of ICTs for the benefit of the rural marginalised. The conventional media in the pre- economic liberalisation period were used to reach the huge rural population for development projects and In the post-liberalisation period, ICT was added to rural development projects to provide information based on individual or communication needs through the Internet.

ICT for 7.3.1 Possible Ways of Implementing ICT for Rural Growth Development From the above, we have learnt that through ICT, village farmers can improve market efficiency. Farmers can easily access any information through ICTs from any place instead of travelling in search of current market prices or business updates. Introducing ICTs has improved communication between sellers and buyers and reduced transaction costs. It has also enabled the rural farmers to conduct their business efficiently and professionally. So, the opportunities offered by the development of ICT in developing countries are plentiful and considerable if the policies are implemented adequately. Interestingly, the scope of ICT is no longer confined to only the information and communication sectors; it has penetrated all sectors and fields. Rural tourism can also be promoted through websites and has a global reach. The following are some of the possible ways to highlight the role of ICTs in promoting rural livelihoods in the country. Distant learning in rural areas can be made possible through ICT as the quality of education can be improved with drastically reduced costs. ICT should be appropriately integrated into the curriculum to train teachers as they are considered knowledge multipliers. To bridge gaps in the reach of educational facilities to marginalised people with low incomes, technological skills must be acquired in all spheres of education. The introduction of ICT for open and distance learning is a step towards bridging the prevalent social and educational gap, especially in rural areas. Studies indicate that ICT in education has helped poor people in rural areas improve their socio-economic conditions. It is a common notion that ICT and its benefits are only affordable to the rich, and they can take advantage of it, be it in education or development in any other sector. So, local government must initiate entrepreneurship and investment, which are also vital for sustaining development for marginalised people. ICT has a major role in healthcare development, especially in rural areas. In the second Unit on ICT and health development, we learned that ICT could help development by improving access to various services. ICT offers scopes for extending public education campaigns such as sanitary behaviour and healthy habits to the rural poor, reinforcing information exchange between researchers across the globe, and valorising establishments of public health development. ICTs have improved health care through the telemedicine delivery model, which is very applicable in rural areas, making it possible for a rural patient to contact a specialist doctor. ICTs also allow the establishment of business links between big commercial companies and small firms in rural areas to enhance adequate business transactions. ICTs can also reduce the chances of saving plantations and crops from environmental risks by providing timely interventions and information to farmers. Land records hold greater significance in contemporary socio-economic laws; from time to time, revision and upgradation are necessary to notice any change in rural social dynamics. Thus, ICT can facilitate the management of data or records of land and create an information base so that any dispute can be handled proficiently. As land 102 is an important factor for agricultural growth, and for the same reason,

creating a database of basic records is significant. ICT application enables ICT and Rural Development minimising the possibility of manipulating existing records. In the same context, ICT can also reduce the manipulation of the basic rights of rural farmers, the majority of whom might not be literate enough to understand their rights. So, in short, we can say from the above discussions that ICTs have been adopted in rural communities to enhance their livelihoods by giving them opportunities to increase their income, thus improving their probabilities of evading persistent poverty.
ICT Projects in Rural India: Case Studies
We have noted that most rural people in India remain isolated from the information revolution. We will discuss some case studies highlighting ICT applications in rural areas where ICT has been used effectively for empowerment and security. Gyandoot: e-Government for development ICT can aptly be used to transform the relations of government agencies with citizens. It is quite common that villagers face harassment and discomfort and must travel for any official work to be done. For a daily wage labourer, a day's value is indescribable, and there is no guarantee that their work will be done in the government office, given that public officials enjoy a monopoly over the relevant official records. In such cases, introducing ICT can offer increased transparency, less corruption, zero monopoly, access to information disclosure and increased responsiveness by public officials. One can access information related to land or any public document through ICT-enabled service centres. Gyandoot, a government-owned computer network, has been trying to help rural people have easy access to government data since 2000. It was launched in the Dhar District of Madhya Pradesh. Through this service, people can not only track business details of wholesale markets but can also lodge complaints about their problems.
Dairy Information Services Kiosk (DISK)
We mentioned earlier that rural farmers are victims of lack of information and ignorance. They may be unaware of the latest market values, crop facts, weather conditions, etc. In such cases, ICT can solve the problems of low- income people, offering them scopes of entrepreneurship and connecting them to bigger markets. The Dairy Information Services Kiosk, an initiative of the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), can be cited as a case study. These systems, equipped with electronic weights and electronic fat testing machines, ensured fair prices for farmers who sell milk to dairy cooperatives, introduced reasonable milk collection methods, and enabled instant payments to farmers based on the quality and quantity of milk delivered. It introduced transparency and faster processing.
Bhoomi: Online Delivery of Land Titles in Karnataka
It is an initiative by the Department of Revenue in Karnataka. It has computerised approximately 20 million land ownership records for 7 million

ICT for farmers in the state. These records will not only improve the system but will Development mostly benefit the farmers by enabling them to obtain bank loans with essential documents without delay. With the Internet-enabled central database, land records are easy to access at kiosk seven in remote areas.
7.3.2 Challenges
Despite the prospects mentioned above, ICT is not a solution for all development challenges in rural areas as it alone cannot bring all desired changes. Some of the major challenges that can hinder the application of ICT in rural areas are - * The foremost problem is illiteracy. Around 40% of India's population is illiterate, and none of the strategies of modern economics can apply in such a scenario. * Insufficient electricity supply and constant power breakdowns are other major issues in rural areas. * Less active users, i.e., the number of people using ICT in rural areas, are small and suffer from connectivity issues. * Lack of technical resources for supporting rural people as not many people want to work in the rural areas where there are shortages of facilities and prosperity. * Lack of timely interventions or implementation of funds for technological growth at the grass root levels.
7.3.3 Ways of Overcoming the ICT Challenges
In a developing country like India, the role of government can play the primary role of presenting a vision for the future by implementing ICT so that all sectors can benefit from it. It is important to develop the existing infrastructure and logical network, and at the same time, improved interconnections at regional and national levels are also required. The challenges of information highways are technological, and some ways through which such challenges can be handled are as follows - * Designing interfaces for letting access to information to illiterate rural masses and making them self-sufficient * Development of internet access line and network * Increase in the extension of telecommunication networks in rural areas. * Improvement of strategies for the elimination of illiteracy * Increase in the number of ICT access providers in rural areas. * Development and establishment of telecentres * Increased investment and funding in the ICT sector * Training of technical activists in rural areas

Check Your Progress: 2 ICT and Rural
Development Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your Answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss the challenges faced by governments in implementing ICT
projects in rural India.

2. Explore the potential applications of ICT in rural development?

3. Analyse the role of ICT projects in rural India through case studies. What
insights can be gained from these case studies?

7.4 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we have learnt that communication is the most important component for development and how effective ICT is in supporting highly influential approaches to human development and freedom, specifically in rural areas. We noticed that harnessing ICTs in rural areas is meant to develop improved solutions to issues like poverty reduction, economic growth, equity, and social injustice. Information and communication technology represents a medium for rural people to surmount their conditions. ICT has the potential to modernise and promote sustainability and development in the agricultural sector. We also discussed how computerisation records are a big issue and the success of ICT applications in rural development. It can also improve the basic amenities and sectors like health, education, food security, etc. ICTs play an imperative role in the development and promotion of rural livelihoods.
7.5 FURTHER READINGS
1. Blum, M. L., Cofini, F., & Sulaiman, V. R. (2020). MODULE 7: ICTs in
Rural Advisory Systems and Services. Agricultural extension in
transition worldwide: Policies and strategies for reform, 115. https://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/ca8199en

ICT for 2. Foko, T. E., Mahwai, N. J., & Phiri, C. A. (2020). Lessons from the Development field: What researchers learned from evaluating ICT platforms for rural development and education. The Journal of Community Informatics, 16, 141-153. https://openjournals.uwaterloo.ca/index.php/JoCI/article/download/3470/ 4572/
3. Hanson, W., & Heeks, R. (2020). Impact of ICTs-in-agriculture on rural
resilience in developing countries. Development Informatics Working Paper, (84). https://www.niccd.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/ DIWkPpr84.pdf
4. Khan, N., Siddiqui, B. N., Khan, N., Khan, F., Ullah, N., Ihtisham, M., ...
& Muhammad, S. (2020). Analyzing mobile phone usage in agricultural modernization and rural development. International Journal of Agricultural Extension, 8(2), 139-147. https://esciencepress.net/ journals/index.php/IJAE/article/viewFile/3255/1711
5. Salemink, K., Strijker, D., & Bosworth, G. (2017). Rural development in
the digital age: A systematic literature review on unequal ICT availability, adoption, and use in rural areas. Journal of Rural Studies, 54, 360-371. https://pure.rug.nl/ws/portalfiles/portal/48596127/ 1_s2.0_S0743016715300176_main.pdf
6. Salanti, V. K., & Raju, T. S. (2020). Education Policy and ICT for Rural
Development in India. Rural Development in India: A Socio-Economic
View, 203.7. Venkatesh, V., Sykes, T., & Zhang, X. (2020). ICT for development in
rural India: A longitudinal study of women's health outcomes. MIS quarterly, 44(2), 605-629. https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/server/api/core/ bitstreams/7d120535-06a5-49c1-9e04-e98d090166d7/content
7.6 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1:
1. Integrating ICT in rural areas profoundly impacts sectors like education,
healthcare, agriculture, and governance. Telemedicine, for instance, facilitates remote consultations, diagnosis, and treatment, addressing the healthcare access gap in remote regions. Similarly, e-agriculture platforms provide real-time market information, empowering farmers to make informed decisions about crop sales and prices. Moreover, e- governance initiatives streamline service delivery processes, reducing bureaucratic hurdles for rural residents. These ICT interventions not only bridge information disparities but also optimise resource allocation, fostering sustainable development in rural communities by enhancing productivity and efficiency.
2. The learning outcomes of studying ICT in rural development encompass
a comprehensive understanding of its transformative potential. This includes recognizing ICT's capacity to address specific challenges faced

by rural communities, such as limited access to essential services and ICT and Rural Development information. By evaluating the applicability of ICT solutions in diverse rural contexts, individuals can develop nuanced strategies tailored to local needs. Moreover, proposing solutions to implementation challenges equips learners with the skills to navigate practical obstacles and ensure the successful integration of ICT for rural development. Ultimately, these learning outcomes empower individuals to contribute effectively to improving the quality of life for rural populations through technology- driven initiatives.
3. Focusing on sectors like rural development deepens our understanding of
ICT's impact on local communities by highlighting the unique challenges and opportunities within these contexts. Unlike broad discussions on national development, sector-specific analyses allow for a more nuanced examination of how ICT interventions interact with existing socio- economic structures in rural areas. By tailoring technology solutions to address specific needs and priorities identified within the rural development sector, we can maximise the effectiveness and relevance of these interventions. This targeted approach ensures that ICT initiatives resonate with local communities and contribute meaningfully to their socio-economic advancement, ultimately fostering inclusive and sustainable development in rural regions. Check Your Progress 2:
1. Implementing ICT projects in rural areas presents various challenges,
including limited infrastructure, low digital literacy rates, and connectivity issues. These challenges can hinder the effective deployment and utilisation of technology, undermining the potential benefits for rural development. To address infrastructure gaps, governments and stakeholders must invest in expanding broadband connectivity and upgrading digital infrastructure in rural areas. Additionally, digital literacy programs should be implemented to enhance the skills of rural residents, enabling them to effectively utilise ICT tools and platforms. Furthermore, partnerships with the private sector can facilitate innovative solutions and sustainable business models for delivering ICT services in rural communities. By addressing these challenges through targeted strategies and collaborative efforts, stakeholders can ensure the successful integration of ICT for rural development, unlocking its transformative potential to uplift rural populations.
2. ICT applications in rural development, such as telemedicine and e-
agriculture, play a crucial role in enhancing access to essential services and fostering socio-economic empowerment in rural communities. Telemedicine initiatives leverage technology to overcome geographical barriers, enabling remote consultations, diagnosis, and treatment for rural residents. Similarly, e-agriculture platforms provide farmers with access to real-time market information, weather forecasts, and agricultural best practices, empowering them to make informed decisions and improve productivity. Additionally, ICT-enabled financial services facilitate

ICT for access to credit, savings, and insurance products, supporting agricultural Development livelihoods and rural entrepreneurship. By leveraging ICT to bridge information gaps, promote knowledge sharing, and empower rural communities, these initiatives contribute to inclusive and sustainable development in rural areas, ultimately enhancing the quality of life for rural populations.
3. Case studies of ICT projects in rural India offer valuable insights into
both successful and unsuccessful interventions, providing valuable lessons for future initiatives. By analysing these case studies, stakeholders can identify best practices, key challenges, and factors influencing the effectiveness of ICT interventions in rural development. Successful case studies highlight innovative approaches, strong partnerships, and community engagement strategies that have contributed to positive outcomes. Conversely, unsuccessful case studies shed light on common pitfalls, such as inadequate infrastructure, limited stakeholder participation, and insufficient sustainability planning. By learning from both successes and failures, stakeholders can refine their strategies, adopt evidence-based approaches, and tailor interventions to local contexts, ultimately improving the effectiveness and impact of ICT projects in rural development.

UNIT 8 ICT AND ENVIRONMENT ICT and Environment
Sustainability
SUSTAINABILITY
Structure
8.0 Introduction
8.1 Learning Outcomes
8.2 Understanding ICT and its Lifecycle Impact on Environment
8.2.1 ICT in the Production Phase
8.2.2 ICT in the Use Phase
8.2.3 ICT in the Disposal Phase
8.3 Key Pillars of Sustainable Development
8.3.1 Ecology
8.3.2 Economics
8.3.3 Ethics
8.4 Green ICT and its Need for Environment Sustainability
8.4.1 ICT Innovations and Sustainable Solutions
8.4.2 Smart Cities and Sustainable Transportation
8.4.3 Energy Efficiency and Green Computing
8.4.4 Smart Grids and Energy Management
8.4.5 Remote Collaboration and Telecommuting
8.4.6 Environmental Monitoring and Management
8.4.7 Precision Agriculture
8.4.8 E-Waste Management
8.5.9 Climate Modelling and Prediction
8.5 Role of Governments, Policy, and Regulations
8.6 Role of Corporate Sector in Achieving Sustainable Development
Through ICT
8.7 Understanding International Frameworks Related to ICT and
Environmental Sustainability
8.8 Case Studies and Best Practices
8.9 Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Developing ICT Solutions for
Environmental Sustainability
8.10 Ethics and Social Responsibility
8.11 Let Us Sum Up
8.12 Keywords
8.13 Further Readings
8.14 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.0 INTRODUCTION
Have you ever wondered how your online activities impact the environment? Alternatively, when you discard an electronic device, you contribute to the

ICT for surging e-waste. Even by searching a single query in the Google search Development engine, you are releasing 0.2 grams of CO2 into the atmosphere (Holzle,
2009) .
However, it is worth mentioning that you alone are not to be blamed. Maybe the technology and the device were designed in such a way that it would impact the climate. Planned obsolescence and the disposable nature of older technologies in the advent of new technologies are making the impact of the ICT sector on climate very much visible. Though this impact is minuscule compared to other sectors' carbon emissions, such as manufacturing, energy, transportation, and aviation, the increasing penetration of digital devices and heavy dependence on IT cannot be ignored. The ICT sector's carbon footprint currently stands at nearly 2 per cent of the global average. It could be further reduced by over 80 per cent if all electricity consumed came from renewable energy sources or devices were switched less frequently. If used well, digital technologies can also help decarbonise other sectors. Smart use of ICT can reduce the impact on other sectors by up to 16 per cent or more (Hankel, 2014). Integrating ICT to create solutions that enhance resource efficiency and reduce environmental impact can contribute to a more sustainable, resilient future and environmental sustainability. In this Unit, we will learn the interrelationship between the ICT and environment sustainability from multiple stakeholders' perspectives.
8.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the meaning of ICT and sustainable development; * Know about Green ICT, its pros and cons, transformations and challenges, and the need for its integration; * Identify the role of different stakeholders in adopting sustainable development and * Learn about the future development roadmap through Green ICT and our role.
8.2 UNDERSTANDING ICT AND ITS
LIFECYCLE IMPACT ON ENVIRONMENT
Information and communication technology (ICT) is a broad term that encompasses communication devices and applications such as radio, television, cellular phones, computer hardware, software, satellite systems, and associated services like videoconferencing and distance learning. Different studies employ varied terms like "ICT," "ICT products," "ICT solutions," "ICT goods," and "ICT services."

European statistics (Eurostat, 2016) defines "ICT" as all technical means for ICT and Environment Sustainability handling information and supporting communication. The OECD (2011) uses the term "ICT products and services," covering various categories. ICT can be categorised broadly in two ways: as ICT solutions (in terms of products and services) and as ICT societies, where ICT plays a vital role in societal life and development, considering all ICT solutions. Many scientific studies propose that ICT can facilitate the transition to a less material-intensive economy, promoting sustainability (Hilty et al., 2011). The Smarter2020 report (GeSi, 2012) outlines ICT's potential role in reducing future energy use and climate change impact through digitalisation, dematerialisation, data collection, communication, systems integration, demobilisation, mass customisation, intelligent operation, and soft transformation and optimisation processes across various sectors. However, ICT usage also has various implications. The environmental impacts of ICT can be categorised into different orders. As per Berkhout and Hertin (2001), there are direct, indirect, and structural/behavioural effects. Figure 8.1: ICT sector development 2007-2020 and forecast to 2030 Source: ericsson.com/mobility-report. Direct effects are negative effects that arise from the manufacturing, use, and disposal of ICT devices, such as e-waste and resource depletion. Indirect effects: These effects are both negative and positive. They result from ICT applications, such as dematerialisation and efficiency gains. E.g. travel substitution transportation optimisation and cultural homogenisation.

ICT for Behavioural/ Structural effects: These are related to lifestyle and structural Development changes caused by ICT, encompassing both positive and negative aspects, including the rebound effect. The overall demand for that service may increase as ICT improves efficiency, reducing resource consumption or environmental impact per Unit of service (e.g., energy-efficient devices). In the context of ICT, increased efficiency might lead to more extensive use and, consequently, a potential increase in resource consumption. This is also known as Jevons' Paradox, named after the economist William Stanley Jevons. Some other examples are changed communication patterns, information overload, digital addiction, the digital divide, job losses, and the shift to the service economy. These changes reshape how we lead our lives on a societal level. Apart from these factors, using information and communication technology (ICT) contributes to its carbon footprint. The carbon footprint concept extends beyond the electricity consumption of ICT products, encompassing the greenhouse gas emissions linked to the energy and materials utilised across the entire product life cycle. This encompasses acquiring raw materials, production and assembly, transportation, operational use, and end- of-life treatment. Notably, the indirect consequences of ICT usage are not accounted for in the carbon footprint calculation despite frequently being more substantial than the footprint itself. The life cycle of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) products (PCs, computer screens, mobile phone networks, fixed-line networks, components like ICs and batteries) and "green data centres" (that store, manage and distribute data) consists of three phases: production, use, and end of life, with the design phase influencing the life cycle substantially. Each phase has its life cycle. Each phase has environmental impacts in terms of consumption of materials and energy. The major energy consumption is primarily in the use phase. This perspective is criticised for oversimplification due to the following reasons: * The mix of electricity sources matters for energy generation. * Phases beyond usage might be more crucial. * Other environmental effects may be more significant than just energy consumption.
8.2.1 ICT in the Production Phase
Early studies on the ecological impacts of computers highlight the significance of the production phase compared to the usage phase. A recent study on desktop PC production in China [Eugster et al., 2007] found that the energy demand for producing a PC equal about three years of typical usage. The usage phase takes roughly six years to balance out the production phase. This comparison becomes even more favourable for the usage phase if the energy supply includes a significant share of non-fossil sources (e.g., hydro,

wind, or solar power). The production of integrated circuits and parts with ICT and Environment Sustainability precious metals is the most energy-intensive aspect of PC production. Assembling the parts has a comparatively minor environmental impact. The production phase of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has a substantial environmental impact, involving resource consumption, energy use, and waste generation. Let us glance over some examples illustrating the environmental impact of ICT production:
High Energy Consumption in Manufacturing Processes: The production
of integrated circuits (ICs) and semiconductor chips, essential components in electronic devices, involves complex manufacturing processes requiring high energy consumption and various chemicals. Mining for Rare Earth Metals: The extraction of rare earth metals, such as neodymium, used in producing magnets for hard drives and other electronic components, contributes to habitat destruction and environmental pollution. Rare earth mining is associated with soil and water contamination. E-waste Generation: The production phase contributes to the generation of electronic waste (e-waste). Improper disposal and recycling of electronic components lead to environmental pollution. For instance, improper disposal of printed circuit boards can release harmful substances like lead and brominated flame retardants into the environment. Carbon Emissions: The energy-intensive processes involved in manufacturing ICT components, including devices like computers and smartphones, contribute to carbon emissions. Using fossil fuels in manufacturing plants increases the carbon footprint of ICT products. Packaging Materials Impact: The packaging materials used to transport and protect ICT products contribute to their environmental impact. Excessive use of non-biodegradable packaging materials adds to the overall ecological footprint. Global Supply Chain Impact: The global nature of ICT supply chains involves transporting components across long distances, contributing to carbon emissions. The transportation of raw materials and finished products also adds to the environmental impact. Water Usage: Water is a crucial resource in the production phase, particularly in semiconductor manufacturing. Water-intensive processes, such as cleaning and cooling, can lead to water scarcity issues in certain regions. Chemical Usage: Electronic device production involves using various chemicals, including solvents and cleaning agents. Inappropriate disposal or mishandling of these chemicals can contaminate soil and water. Addressing these environmental impacts through sustainable practices, such as eco-friendly manufacturing processes, responsible sourcing of raw materials, and effective e-waste management and recycling initiatives, is important.

ICT for 8.2.2 ICT in the Use Phase
Development In the use phase, an ICT product provides its service to the user. Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) studies measure environmental impact based on a functional unit, like "1 hour of PC use." Considering its substantial production impact, the key environmentally relevant factor during ICT use is the device's useful life. Using a device for a more extended period, say six years instead of three, reduces the production impact per functional Unit by half. Generally, the longevity of ICT devices matters more than their power consumption during use. However, in cases like servers running 24/7, energy consumption during use becomes crucial. Short software innovation cycles can harm hardware life, negatively impacting the environment. Extracting precious metals, especially gold, for electronics significantly contributes to their overall environmental impact. The use phase of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) products involves their operation and energy consumption during normal usage. Here are some examples illustrating the environmental impact of ICT in the use phase: Energy Consumption: The operation of ICT devices, such as computers, smartphones, and servers, requires a significant amount of energy. For instance, data centres that host online services consume vast amounts of electricity. Carbon Emissions: The electricity used to power ICT devices often comes from fossil fuel-based sources. This contributes to carbon emissions and exacerbates climate change. The carbon footprint depends on the energy mix of the devices used in the region. Electronic Waste (E-waste): The use phase contributes to electronic waste generation, especially when devices become obsolete or are discarded. Devices with short lifespans or those that are not easily upgradable contribute to a faster turnover of electronic products. Phantom Energy Consumption: Many ICT devices, such as phantom or standby power, consume energy even when not used actively. For instance, leaving a computer or television on standby mode can consume unnecessary energy over time. Internet Infrastructure Impact: The use of online services, streaming platforms, and cloud computing contributes to the overall energy consumption of the Internet infrastructure. Data transmission, storage, and processing in data centres have environmental implications. Short Device Lifespan: The relatively short lifespan of some ICT devices, driven by rapid technological advancements and changing consumer preferences, can result in more frequent replacements. This leads to increased production-related environmental impacts and e-waste. Cooling Systems: High-performance ICT equipment, especially in data centres, requires extensive cooling systems to prevent overheating. These cooling systems consume additional energy, contributing to the overall environmental impact.

Resource Depletion: Using certain minerals and metals in ICT devices, such ICT and Environment Sustainability as coltan in smartphones, can contribute to resource depletion. Unsustainable mining practices for these materials can lead to environmental degradation.
Emission from Network Infrastructure: Example: Telecommunication
networks, including mobile networks and broadband, contribute to energy consumption and emissions. The energy usage of base stations and data transmission contribute to the overall impact. Addressing the environmental impact in the use phase involves promoting energy efficiency, designing products for longevity and upgradability, and encouraging responsible consumer behaviour, such as proper disposal and recycling of electronic devices. Fig.8.2 Delhi-based Namo E-waste Management, a recycler cum PRO (Producer Responsibility Organisation), extracts metals such as aluminium, copper, brass and zinc from e-waste products that include computers, motherboards, mobile phones, and server boards (source Indian Express).
8.2.3 ICT in the Disposal Phase
The disposal phase of an ICT product, often called the end-of-life phase, involves properly discarding or recycling the product. During this phase, the environmental impact is influenced by the methods used for disposal. Examples of ICT environment impact in the disposal phase include: Improper E-Waste Disposal: Discarding electronic devices in landfills without proper recycling leads to leaching of hazardous materials into soil and water, posing environmental and health risks. Informal E-Waste Recycling: Unregulated recycling practices, common in some developing countries, lead to health hazards for workers and environmental pollution due to inadequate processing methods.

ICT for Recycling electronic waste is a significant and growing concern globally due Development to the increasing volume of Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE). Despite methodological challenges in assessing environmental impacts, recycling e-waste is environmentally beneficial, saving around 20- 25% of the energy consumed in the production phase by recovering metals. However, the environmental benefits are contingent on proper recycling processes, and informal recycling, prevalent in some emerging economies, poses health and environmental risks. Many countries implement WEEE recycling systems, but challenges arise when integrating ICT products into everyday objects, creating new recycling challenges. There is a vast informal industry in India which recycles WEEE mainly to recover gold and copper. It is deemed profitable if the health and environmental impacts are not accounted for. Figure 8.3: Shows the extraction of copper from printed wiring boards in a typical backyard company with 12 workers in Delhi. This company recovers 1-2 tons of copper per month [Widmer et al., 2005].
8.3 KEY PILLARS OF SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
As Ismail Serageldin (2006) states, "Sustainability is giving future generations as many opportunities as, if not more than, we have had ourselves." Sustainable development is a holistic approach that integrates economic, social, and environmental considerations to create a balanced and enduring future. It refers to a mode of growth or progress that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. It encompasses:
8.3.1 Ecology
Environmental Protection is the most important pillar. It acknowledges a responsibility to care for and protect the environment by implementing practices that ensure the sustainable use of natural resources. It aims to protect and preserve the natural environment, biodiversity, and ecosystems for current and future generations. It involves sustainable resource management, conservation efforts, pollution reduction, and measures to combat climate change.

8.3.2 Economics ICT and Environment
Sustainability We cannot thrive without Economic Sustainability. It focuses on promoting economic growth that is inclusive, equitable, and contributes to the overall well-being of society. Emphasises responsible and sustainable business practices, fair trade, and the efficient use of resources to support long-term economic viability and foster innovation and adopting practices that enhance economic resilience. However, creating eco-friendly products or services is challenging because they often support the same market-driven system they aim to improve. This is called "The Paradox of Green Consumerism". The world emphasises sustaining economic growth, but many argue that continuous growth is incompatible with environmental well-being. When green initiatives operate within existing market structures, there is concern that they may reach a point where they cannot effectively lead us towards a truly sustainable future.
8.3.3 Ethics
Ethics are crucial in the context of sustainability. They provide guiding principles and moral standards that help individuals and organisations make decisions aligned with sustainable practices. They set a moral compass and ensure that actions taken for sustainability are not merely short-term solutions but contribute to the long-term well-being of individuals, communities, and the environment. Ethics recognises the impact of human activities on the environment and takes responsibility for minimising negative effects. They hold individuals, organisations, and governments accountable for their environmental actions. Ethical consideration encourages individuals to make ethical choices in their consumption patterns and supports environmentally friendly products and practices. It concentrates on ensuring social equity, justice, and ethical well- being for all members of society. It addresses poverty, education, healthcare, human rights, and social inclusion to create a just and cohesive community. It fosters intergenerational responsibility, considering the needs of present and future generations in decision-making. Strive for a balanced and harmonious coexistence with the environment. Enhance Global Cooperation: Recognising the interconnectedness of global challenges. It encourages collaboration and cooperation among nations to address shared sustainability goals. It also encourages transparency by providing clear and accurate information about environmental practices. This allows stakeholders to make informed decisions and hold entities accountable. It promotes community engagement by involving communities in decision-making processes related to environmental sustainability. It respects and considers local knowledge and values.

ICT for Check Your Progress: 1
Development Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Design a Green ICT initiative for a local community or organisation.
Consider aspects such as energy efficiency, waste reduction, and sustainable practices. Additionally, discuss how this Green ICT initiative aligns with broader environmental sustainability goals.

8.4 GREEN ICT AND ITS NEED FOR
ENVIRONMENT SUSTAINABILITY
Historically, technology, including IT, has acted as a "force multiplier," allowing humans to achieve more significant impact with less effort, similar to the invention of agricultural implements or powerful weapons. ICT effectively compresses time by storing vast information, modelling the past, predicting the future, and synchronising human activities. It also compresses space through long-distance communication and global mapping and facilitates the worldwide transportation of goods and people. Additionally, ICT simplifies complexity by enhancing memory, performing calculations, and establishing cooperation standards. In human institutions, ICT serves as a bridge between different scales, providing individuals with accessible information about institution-scale phenomena. It enables institutions to make informed decisions based on expert opinions, computational simulations, modelling, and visualisation. By connecting human, institutional, and environmental scales, IT empowers individuals to impact environmental concerns through institutional mediation. The intersection of environmental issues and ICT is known as Green ICT. The term "Green" here signifies an awareness of the environmental impact of human activities, symbolised by the colour of plant leaves. It helps to make all aspects of society greener, including IT itself. It explores the potential for ICT to address global ecosystem issues. While technology has historically contributed to environmental issues, Green ICT focuses on mitigating these problems and promoting sustainable living. It thrives on converging two prominent trends: the growing global concern for environmental issues and the swift expansion of information and communication technology (ICT). The first trend involves an increasing awareness of environmental issues. The second trend focuses on the widespread proliferation of ICT globally. Once a rarity, mobile phones are now owned by over half of the world's population.

Green IT's primary goal is to spread information about environmental ICT and Environment Sustainability concerns and enable individuals and organisations to adopt best practices. Existing examples of environmental ICT systems include smart energy grids and systems optimising hybrid car engines, as well as GPS and online mapping software. Green IT promotes efficient travel and reduces CO2 emissions. Green ICT can be categorised along the axis of "personal" and "institutional" applications. * Personal IT systems empower individuals and small groups to enhance their understanding and response to environmental concerns. * Institutional IT systems extend this impact to larger organisations, including corporations, governments, NGOs, and universities. These two forms of Green IT work together to address environmental challenges and promote sustainability. However, we should not forget that Green ICT is not a panacea. It may be able to help, but it is not a magic wand. "Technology will not save the world; people will. New forms of IT, different from growth technologies, will help to solve the current untenable issues" (Tomlinson, 2010).
8.4.1 ICT Innovations and Sustainable Solutions
The potential opportunities in ICT and Sustainable Solutions are significant. Information and Communication Technology (ICT) can extend healthcare services to remote rural areas, enhance the efficiency of electricity grids, and optimise traffic flow. ICT solutions, incorporating technologies like IoT, machine learning, and automation, hold substantial promise for globally reducing carbon emissions across various sectors and industries. Current ICT solutions are estimated to have the potential to decrease global carbon emissions by up to 15 per cent, equivalent to about one-third of the crucial emission reduction target by 2030. The advent of new technologies such as 5G, IoT, and AI will create additional possibilities for emission reduction. Realising these opportunities and avoiding adverse use will be crucial in the world's efforts to limit global warming. Integrating Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in various domains contributes to sustainable solutions and environmental conservation. Key applications include the implementation of IoT (Internet of Things) devices for smart city technologies, optimisation of renewable energy integration, digital platforms for circular economy practices, blockchain for supply chain transparency, AI-driven environmental monitoring, eco-friendly computing, digital twins for sustainability, precision agriculture with drones and sensors, ICT in conservation using remote sensing and satellite imaging, and the incorporation of ICT in green transportation solutions for traffic optimisation and promoting sustainable modes of transportation.

ICT for Check Your Progress: 2
Development Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit
1. To support sustainable development, what role can ICT play in
promoting inclusive and equitable access to education, healthcare, and other essential services, particularly in developing regions?

8.4.2 Smart Cities and Sustainable Transportation
"Smart Cities" have emerged globally due to rapid urban growth, rural-urban migration, and socio-economic divides. "smart" is synonymous with connected, resilient, intelligent, or digital communities. Key components of smart cities include interoperability, sustainability, city- wide connectivity, security, adequate transportation, and public-private partnerships. India is rapidly adopting the concept as its urban population is expected to contribute significantly to its GDP. Smart cities incorporate competition, capital, and sustainability, providing good infrastructure and open access to amenities. The environment plays a critical role in urban safety and greenery. Urbanisation and climate change are converging, posing threats to urban regions globally. Despite challenges, cities have the potential to be centres of attraction for social and economic development. Resilience in urban societies depends on factors like climate, land use, human values, and policies. Climate-resilient smart cities require disaster-resistant infrastructure and response capacities. Smart cities focus on becoming citizen-centric and environmentally friendly through technology. Smart city technologies using IoT (Internet of Things) devices and sensors can increase efficiency in planning, implementation, energy consumption, waste management, transportation, and urban planning. Transportation systems with ICT integration can help optimise traffic flow, reduce emissions, and promote sustainable modes of transportation, such as electric vehicles and shared mobility services.
8.4.3 Energy Efficiency and Green Computing
Energy efficiency and green computing are essential aspects of sustainable IT practices. One example of energy efficiency in computing is the implementation of virtualisation technologies. Virtualisation allows a single physical server to run multiple virtual machines, each operating as an 120 independent server. This helps optimise server resources, reduce the need for

additional physical servers, and consequently lower energy consumption. ICT and Environment Sustainability Green computing also involves using energy-efficient hardware components. For instance, companies and data centres may opt for energy-efficient processors, solid-state drives (SSDs) that consume less power than traditional hard disk drives (HDDs), and energy-efficient power supplies. Moreover, cloud computing services contribute to energy efficiency by consolidating data centres and enabling resource-sharing among multiple users. Cloud providers optimise server utilisation, leading to lower energy consumption per user. Additionally, power management features in computers and data centres, such as dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS), help adjust the power usage based on the workload. This ensures that systems consume only the necessary power at any given time. These examples showcase how energy efficiency and green computing practices can significantly reduce the environmental impact of IT operations.
8.4.4 Smart Grids and Energy Management
Smart grids and energy management systems are crucial in optimising energy distribution and consumption. Here are examples of their applications: Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI): Smart meters are deployed to collect real-time data on energy consumption. Consumers can monitor and manage their energy usage more efficiently, and utilities can gain insights into load forecasting and grid optimisation. Demand Response Programs are automated systems that adjust energy usage in response to demand fluctuations or price signals. They reduce peak demand, enhance grid stability, and allow consumers to save on energy costs by adjusting consumption during peak times. Grid Automation: Utilises sensors, communication networks, and control systems to automate grid operations. It improves grid reliability, reduces outage durations, and enhances the integration of renewable energy sources. Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) Integration: Integrates renewable energy sources, energy storage, and electric vehicles into the grid. It maximises the use of clean energy, improves grid resilience, and allows for better management of distributed energy generation. Energy Storage Systems: Batteries and other storage technologies store excess energy during low-demand periods and for use during high-demand periods. This balances supply and demand, supports intermittent renewable sources, and enhances grid stability. Home Energy Management Systems (HEMS) are smart devices and systems that allow homeowners to monitor and control their energy usage. They enable consumers to make informed decisions, optimise energy consumption, and save on electricity bills.

ICT for Grid Analytics: Development Electric Vehicle (EV) Charging Management: Smart charging infrastructure that optimises the charging process for electric vehicles.
8.4.5 Remote Collaboration and Telecommuting
Remote collaboration and telecommuting have become integral components of modern work culture, especially with the advancement of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Here are some examples illustrating the application of remote collaboration and telecommuting: Video Conferencing Platforms reduce the need for physical presence, enhance communication, and enable real-time collaboration. For example, Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and Cisco Webex facilitate virtual face-to-face meetings, fostering collaboration among remote teams. Cloud-Based Project Management Tools: These tools facilitate remote coordination, ensure transparent workflow management, and keep team members on the same page. Tools like Asana, Trello, and Jira provide centralised platforms for project management, allowing teams to collaborate on tasks and projects. Document Collaboration Platforms enhance document sharing and editing, support version control, and ensure seamless collaboration on shared files. For example, Google Workspace, Microsoft 365, and Dropbox enable real- time collaboration on documents, spreadsheets, and presentations. Virtual Whiteboards facilitate visual collaboration, allow remote ideation sessions, and ensure team engagement in creative processes. Tools like Miro and Microsoft Whiteboard offer digital brainstorming and collaborative drawing platforms. Instant Messaging and Team Chat Apps: These apps support quick communication, reduce email overload, and enhance team connectivity regardless of physical location. For example, apps like Slack, Microsoft Teams, and Telegram provide teams with real-time messaging and collaboration channels. Telecommuting Software Suites: Assists in monitoring productivity, ensures accountability in remote work, and provides insights into team performance. For example, software suites like Remote HQ and Hubstaff offer various tools for time tracking, virtual collaboration, and remote team management. Augmented Reality (AR) for Remote Assistance: Facilitates remote troubleshooting, improves training processes, and supports hands-on tasks without physical presence. For example, AR tools like Microsoft HoloLens enable remote experts to assist by overlaying digital information onto physical objects. Virtual Reality (VR) for Team Building: Enhances team bonding, offers immersive experiences, and creates virtual environments for collaborative activities. For example, VR platforms like AltspaceVR and Engage VR provide virtual team meetings and social interaction spaces. Top of Form

8.4.6 Environmental Monitoring and Management ICT and Environment
Sustainability Environmental monitoring uses technology to track and manage diverse aspects of the environment, involving collecting, analysing, and interpreting data to understand and respond to environmental changes. Examples include air and water quality monitoring systems, remote sensing satellites, smart grids for energy efficiency, wildlife tracking systems, and noise pollution monitoring devices. Some other examples are: * The application of technology in environmental monitoring aims to oversee and regulate different facets of the environment by gathering, analysing, and interpreting data to comprehend and address environmental shifts. * Systems measuring air quality employ sensors to detect pollutants, delivering real-time air quality data for swift intervention in worsening conditions. * Devices monitoring water quality, equipped with sensors, ensure the safety of water bodies by identifying pollutants. * Satellites with sensors capture data on land use, deforestation, and vegetation changes, facilitating large-scale environmental monitoring. * Smart grids integrate technology for real-time monitoring and management of energy consumption, boosting distribution efficiency and reducing environmental impact. * Wildlife tracking systems utilise GPS and sensors to monitor wildlife movements, aiding conservation efforts and ecological understanding. * Devices measuring noise levels in urban areas identify sources of noise pollution, enabling the implementation of mitigation measures.
8.4.7 Precision Agriculture
Precision Agriculture, also known as precision farming or precision ag, uses advanced technologies to optimise farming practices. It employs information technology, sensors, and data analytics to enhance agriculture's efficiency, productivity, and sustainability. The primary goal is to enable precise decision-making in crop management, resource utilisation, and overall farm operations. Examples of Precision Agriculture Technologies: * Satellite Imagery: Uses satellite data to monitor crop health, identify potential issues, and assess overall field conditions, aiding farmers in making data-driven decisions. * GPS-guided Equipment: Implements GPS technology for accurate navigation and control of farm machinery during planting, fertilising, and harvesting, minimising resource wastage. * Sensor Technology: Utilises sensors to collect real-time data on soil moisture, nutrient levels, and crop health. The data is analysed to optimise irrigation, fertilisation, and pest control strategies.

ICT for * Drones: These are deployed for aerial crop monitoring and provide high- Development resolution imagery. They facilitate quick and detailed assessments of large agricultural areas and aid in early problem identification. * Automated Machinery: Incorporates automated and robotic machinery for planting, weeding, and harvesting tasks. This reduces labour requirements and enhances precision in field operations.
8.4.8 E-Waste Management
E-waste management involves appropriately handling and disposing of electronic waste, such as computers and mobile phones, to mitigate environmental and health risks. The process includes organised collection from various sources, safe transportation to processing facilities, sorting, recycling valuable materials, and properly disposing of hazardous components. Secure data destruction is essential for data security before recycling. Challenges include informal recycling practices in developing countries, the impact of rapid technological advances on recycling infrastructure, and a lack of consumer awareness. Effective e-waste management offers benefits such as resource recovery, environmental protection, energy conservation, and job creation in formal management systems. E-waste management is vital for addressing environmental and health challenges linked to electronic waste. Practices like proper collection, recycling, and awareness contribute to resource conservation and environmental sustainability.
8.4.9 Climate Modelling and Prediction
Climate modelling and prediction use sophisticated computational models to replicate Earth's climate system and forecast forthcoming climatic conditions. These models amalgamate diverse elements such as atmospheric, oceanic, and land processes while considering anthropogenic influences. They are essential for comprehending climate dynamics, evaluating potential impacts, and guiding strategies for mitigating and adapting to climate change. Its essential components are: Replication of Climate Processes: Climate models replicate intricate interactions among the atmosphere, oceans, land surfaces, and ice, capturing the dynamics of climate processes. Anthropogenic Influences: Models factor in human activities like greenhouse gas emissions and land-use changes, significantly influencing the climate. Forecasting and Anticipating: Climate models offer forecasts of future climate scenarios, aiding scientists, and policymakers in anticipating changes and planning accordingly. Analysis of Uncertainty and Sensitivity: Scientists perform analyses to comprehend the limitations and reliability of model predictions through 124 uncertainty and sensitivity assessments, considering various input parameters.

Global and Regional Modelling: Models operate on global and regional ICT and Environment Sustainability scales, providing insights into broader climatic trends and localised impacts. Verification and Validation: Model outputs undergo verification and validation against observational data to enhance accuracy and reliability. Climate modelling faces significant challenges, including the complexity of addressing numerous interconnected factors, demanding substantial computational resources. Uncertainties within models arise from incomplete data, limited understanding of specific processes, and the intricate nature of Earth's climate system. Predicting regional impacts remains challenging due to the complexities of local climatic variations, and ongoing efforts focus on enhancing the spatial and temporal resolution for more detailed and accurate predictions. Applications: Climate models are crucial guides in policy development related to climate change mitigation and adaptation. They are vital in planning resilient infrastructure capable of withstanding future climate- related challenges. Understanding climate impacts contributes significantly to effective ecosystem management, aiding biodiversity conservation and natural resource preservation. Climate modelling is instrumental in assessing risks associated with extreme weather events, sea-level rise, and other climate-related phenomena. Climate modelling and prediction are pivotal in comprehending, anticipating, and addressing Earth's climate system intricacies, thereby facilitating sustainable decision-making and adaptation efforts.
8.5 ROLE OF GOVERNMENTS, POLICY, AND
REGULATIONS
Governments play a pivotal role in addressing environmental challenges through legislative and regulatory measures. They institute laws covering emission standards, waste disposal guidelines, and conservation measures, establishing a legal foundation for sustainable practices and penalising harmful activities. The formulation of proactive policies delineates the government's stance on environmental sustainability, guiding decision- making across sectors like energy, transportation, waste management, and natural resource conservation. Incentive programs, such as tax credits and subsidies, encourage eco-friendly practices among businesses and individuals. These incentives aim to promote sustainability, especially in renewable energy projects and energy-efficient technologies. Recognising the global nature of environmental issues, governments engage in international cooperation, participating in agreements focused on climate change, biodiversity conservation, and pollution control. Governments are responsible for monitoring and enforcing compliance with environmental regulations, employing robust mechanisms like inspections and penalties to ensure adherence. They also play a crucial role in raising public awareness through education campaigns, informing the public about the importance of conservation, recycling, and reducing carbon footprints.

ICT for Additionally, governments invest in research and development initiatives to Development advance sustainable technologies, providing funding and support for innovations in renewable energy, eco-friendly materials, and sustainable agriculture. In summary, governments establish regulatory frameworks and incentivise, monitor, and enforce practices aligned with ecological well- being. Their multifaceted role extends to raising public awareness and supporting research for a more sustainable future. Some of the ICT initiatives taken by the Indian government. National Digital Library (NDL), E-PGPathshala. e-Adhyayan, Shodhganaga platform, e- ShodhSindhu platform, e-yantra, FOSSEE ((Free/Libre and Open-Source
Software for Education), Spoken Tutorial portal, Digi Locker, PMJDY,
PAHAL
8.6 ROLE OF CORPORATE SECTOR IN
ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT THROUGH ICT
The corporate sector drives sustainable development by integrating Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Key aspects include: * Innovation and Technology Adoption: Corporations innovate with smart technologies, IoT, and data analytics to manage resources and monitor environmental conditions. * Operational Efficiency: ICT enables streamlined processes, data-driven decisions, and lower resource consumption, enhancing operational efficiency. * Supply Chain Sustainability: Through ICT, such as blockchain, corporations ensure transparent and sustainable supply chains, promote ethical sourcing, and reduce environmental impact. * Renewable Energy Integration: Many invest in renewable energy solutions and use ICT for smart grids, energy management, and real-time monitoring. * Remote Work and Telecommuting: ICT tools facilitate remote work, reducing commuting and carbon emissions and enhancing work-life balance. * Environmental Monitoring and Reporting: ICT enables corporations to monitor and report environmental impact, aiding in continuous improvement strategies. * Data-driven Sustainability Reporting: Corporations use ICT to collect, analyse, and report sustainability data, promoting accountability and responsible business behaviour. * Eco-friendly Product Design: ICT optimises materials and manufacturing processes for eco-friendly design. * Corporate Social Responsibility: ICT enhances CSR initiatives through community support, education investment, and technology-driven social impact projects.

* Collaboration and Partnerships: Corporations collaborate within and ICT and Environment Sustainability beyond industries, leveraging ICT for communication, knowledge- sharing, and impactful sustainability initiatives. Examples: * Tesla utilises ICT for smart grid solutions, optimising energy consumption in electric vehicles. * IKEA uses blockchain for supply chain transparency, ensuring ethical sourcing of materials. * Google employs remote work tools like Google Workspace, reducing carbon emissions from commuting. * Apple employs data analytics to monitor carbon emissions across its supply chain, informing sustainability strategies. * Unilever leverages ICT for sustainable product design, incorporating recycled materials in packaging.
8.7 UNDERSTANDING INTERNATIONAL
FRAMEWORKS RELATED TO ICT AND
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
International frameworks in Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) and environmental sustainability aim to guide global efforts towards a more eco-friendly and responsible use of technology. Key frameworks include: United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): * SDGs encompass environmental sustainability goals, recognising ICT as an enabler. SDG 7 emphasises affordable and clean energy, utilising ICT for smart grids and energy-efficient technologies. ITU-T Recommendations: * ITU provides recommendations for using ICT to achieve environmental sustainability. It recommends methodologies for assessing the environmental impact of ICT. ISO 14001 - Environmental Management Systems: * ISO 14001 sets criteria for environmental management systems. Organisations use ISO 14001 to manage environmental aspects, including ICT-related. ICLEI - Local Governments for Sustainability: * ICLEI guides local governments in sustainable development and integration of ICT. Cities use ICT in smart city initiatives to optimise resource use and reduce environmental impact.

ICT for Green ICT Initiative by GeSI: Development * GeSI promotes ICT for environmental and social sustainability. * GeSI's Green ICT toolkit aids companies in assessing and improving the sustainability of their ICT practices. The Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI): GeSI works on initiatives highlighting the role of ICT in sustainable development. * Example: GeSI collaborates on tools like the "Digital with Purpose" report, emphasising ICT's positive impact on sustainability. Climate Savers Computing Initiative: * Focuses on improving energy efficiency in computers and servers. Companies like Google and Intel commit to reducing ICT-related carbon emissions. Circular Economy Action Plan by the European Union: It aims to make products more sustainable and reduce waste, emphasising ICT. Implementation of circular economy practices in designing and disposing of electronic devices. These frameworks offer guidelines, standards, and initiatives for aligning ICT practices with global environmental sustainability goals. Organisations and governments can leverage these frameworks to shape policies, strategies, and actions for more sustainable ICT use.
8.8 CASE STUDIES AND BEST PRACTICES
Few Best Practices and Case Studies in the Field of ICT and Innovation.
1) Aadhaar (India):
Aadhaar, India's biometric identification system, is a noteworthy o ICT initiative that provides residents with a unique identity to facilitate efficient service delivery and reduce fraud. The Aadhaar system streamlined government services, improved o subsidy distribution, and enhanced financial inclusion.
2) Aarogya Setu App (India):
The Aarogya Setu app, launched by the Indian government, was o crucial in tracing contacts and providing COVID-19-related information. It showcased the use of technology for public health initiatives o during the pandemic.
3) UPI (India):
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) revolutionised digital payments in o India, enabling seamless, real-time bank transactions through mobile devices.

UPI's success led to a surge in digital transactions, promoting a ICT and Environment o Sustainability cashless economy and fostering financial inclusion.
4) Bharti Airtel's Mobile Services (India):
Airtel's mobile services connect people across India. They leveraged o technological advancements to offer reliable and affordable mobile communication. Airtel's growth and innovative services showcase the impact of ICT o in expanding connectivity and bridging communication gaps.
5) Smart Cities Mission (India):
India's Smart Cities Mission focuses on using ICT for urban o development, aiming to enhance infrastructure, improve services, and promote sustainability in selected cities. Projects in cities like Pune and Bhubaneswar demonstrate the o implementation of smart technologies for efficient waste management, traffic control, and citizen services.
6) E-Government in Estonia:
Estonia excelled in e-government, providing digital public services o and e-residency options, showcasing streamlined governance through digital platforms. Estonia's digital services, including e-residency and e-governance, o illustrate how ICT enhances government efficiency and citizen engagement.
7) Silicon Valley Tech Innovation:
Silicon Valley in the United States is a global hub for tech o innovation, with companies like Apple, Google, and Facebook continuously innovating and transforming the use of ICT. The success stories of Silicon Valley companies highlight the impact o of fostering an innovation ecosystem, attracting talent, and driving economic growth.
8) South Korea's 5G Deployment:
South Korea has led 5G deployment, transforming communication o with ultra-fast internet speeds and low latency. The rapid adoption of 5G in South Korea showcases ICT's potential o to revolutionise connectivity and enable emerging technologies.
9) M-Pesa in Kenya:
By leveraging ICT, m-Pesa, a mobile money service in Kenya, we o have transformed financial transactions, especially in rural areas. M-Pesa's success demonstrates the impact of innovative mobile o solutions in enhancing financial inclusion and accessibility. These case studies exemplify how ICT and innovation contribute to societal development, economic growth, and improved services, providing valuable examples for sustainable development globally.

ICT for Check Your Progress: 3
Development Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit
1. Explain why these best practices are considered exemplary and how they
contribute to the society's overall efficiency, sustainability, or innovation.

8.9 INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP
IN DEVELOPING ICT SOLUTIONS FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Technology innovation continuously propels the creation of eco-friendly ICT solutions. Entrepreneurs recognise opportunities in emerging technologies and develop sustainable products and services to address environmental challenges. * Renewable Energy Integration: Innovative ICT solutions emerge, integrating renewable energy sources to enhance power consumption sustainability. Entrepreneurial start-ups focus on providing renewable energy solutions for data centres or promoting energy-efficient devices. * Smart Infrastructure: Innovation drives the creation of smart grids, intelligent transportation systems, and connected infrastructure, optimising resource use. Entrepreneurs establish companies specialising in developing and implementing smart city solutions for enhanced sustainability. * IoT and Environmental Monitoring: Innovation leveraging the Internet of Things (IoT) enables real-time environmental monitoring and data collection. Entrepreneurs respond by developing IoT devices and platforms to monitor air quality, water usage, and various environmental parameters. * Circular Economy Solutions: Innovative design focuses on ICT products aligned with the circular economy, emphasising reuse and recycling. Entrepreneurs launch businesses refurbishing electronic devices or promoting sustainable e-waste management. * Data Analytics for Sustainability: Innovation employs data analytics to optimise resource use, reduce waste, and enhance overall sustainability. Entrepreneurs develop analytics platforms for businesses to measure and improve their environmental impact. * Collaboration Platforms: Innovation leads to creating collaborative platforms, which enable organisations to work together on sustainability

initiatives. Entrepreneurs establish businesses that facilitate collaboration ICT and Environment Sustainability for shared sustainability goals. * Educational and Awareness Tools: This company produces tools and technologies for environmental education and awareness. Entrepreneurs create platforms that engage users in sustainable practices and provide information on eco-friendly choices. * Remote Work Solutions: Innovation supports the development of technologies for remote work, reducing the need for commuting and associated environmental impact. Entrepreneurs offer virtual collaboration solutions, decreasing traditional office-based work's ecological footprint. * Policy and Advocacy Platforms: Innovation creates ICT platforms to influence and support environmental policies and advocacy. Entrepreneurs establish businesses focused on influencing policymakers and promoting sustainable practices.
8.10 ETHICS AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Ethics in environmental sustainability is crucial for creating a world where human activities harmonise with nature, fostering a healthy and resilient planet for current and future generations. It involves a commitment to ethical decision-making, accountability, and a shared responsibility for the well- being of the Earth and its ecosystems.
1. Stewardship: Acknowledging a responsibility to care for and protect the
environment.
2. Responsibility: Recognising the impact of human activities on the
environment and taking responsibility for minimising adverse effects.
3. Justice and Equity: Ensuring fair distribution of environmental benefits
and burdens and addressing environmental issues with consideration for vulnerable and marginalised communities.
4. Intergenerational Equity: Considering the needs and rights of future
generations in current decision-making.
5. Transparency: Providing clear and accurate information about
environmental practices.
6. Conservation and Biodiversity: Support conservation efforts to protect
biodiversity and avoid actions contributing to species or ecosystems' loss.
7. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) involves integrating ethical
environmental practices into business operations and balancing economic interests with social and environmental responsibilities.
8. Community Engagement: Involving communities in decision-making
processes related to environmental sustainability.
9. Global Cooperation: Recognising that environmental challenges often
transcend national borders and promoting international collaboration to address global sustainability issues.

ICT for 10. Ethical Consumption: Encouraging individuals to make ethical Development consumption patterns and supporting environmentally friendly products and practices. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit
1. Choose a recent innovation in Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) that has significantly impacted society.

8.11 LET US SUM UP
"Technology is neither good nor bad; nor is it neutral. It is the use that makes it good or bad" Melvin Kranzberg. In conclusion, we can say that integrating Information and Communication Technology (ICT) with sustainability initiatives is imperative for addressing environmental challenges and fostering a more resilient and eco-friendly future. As evidenced by best practices and case studies, ICT innovations are pivotal in streamlining services, promoting financial inclusion, enhancing connectivity, and contributing to urban development. International frameworks guide aligning ICT practices with global sustainability goals. The COVID-19 pandemic has further underscored the significance of digital solutions in crisis response and management.
8.12 KEYWORDS
Green data centre: A green data centre is a facility that stores, manages, and distributes data while minimising environmental impact and maximising energy efficiency. Carbon footprint: A carbon footprint is a value that compares the amount of greenhouse gases that a person, product, company, or country releases into the atmosphere. It measures the impact of an activity. Digital twin: A digital twin is a digital model of an intended or actual real- world physical product, system, or process that serves as its indistinguishable digital counterpart for practical purposes, such as simulation, integration, testing, monitoring, and maintenance. Blockchain is a method of recording information that makes it impossible or difficult for the system to be changed, hacked, or manipulated. Blockchain technology is applied to supply chains to ensure transparency and traceability, especially in industries like food, where consumers can trace the origin of products.

8.13 FURTHER READINGS ICT and Environment
Sustainability
1. Berry, M., Hazen, B., MacIntyre, R., & Flamm, R. (1996). Lucas: A
system for modelling land-use
2. Change. Computational Science and Engineering, 3(1), 24-35.3. Bregman, J. I., & Lenormand, S. (1966). The pollution paradox. New
York: Spartan Books.
4. Bruce, M. (2009, January). Greening of the Internet economy--
Conference. Retrieved
5. from http://greeninternet.calit2.net/
6. Eurostat. (2016). Glossary: Information and communication technology
(ICT). Eurostat 2016. Available from http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ statisticsexplained/index.php/Glossary:ICT
7. Hilty, Lorenz & Hischier, Roland & Ruddy, Thomas & Som, Claudia.
(2008). Informatics and the Life Cycle of Products.
8. Several LCA studies on PCs [Atlantic Consulting & IPU, 1998; von
Geibler et al., 2003; Hikwama, 2005; Eugster et al., 2007
9. Hilty, L. M., & Aebischer, B. (2014). ICT innovations for sustainability.
Springer.
10. Hu, W. (2012). Sustainable ICTs and management systems for green
computing.
11. Just a moment... (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.ericsson.com/
en/reports-and-papers/industrylab/reports/a-quick-guide-to-your-digital- carbon-footprint
12. Mishra, R., Kumari, C., Krishna, P., & Dubey, A. (2022). Smart Cities
for Sustainable Development: An Overview. 10.1007/978-981-16-7410- 5_1.13. Tomlinson, B. (2012). Greening through IT: Information technology for
environmental sustainability. MIT Press
14. The ITU new initiatives programme: Ubiquitous network societies.
(2005).
8.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Give real-life examples of the following:
a) Energy Efficiency b) Waste Reduction c) Sustainable Practices
d) Alignment with Environmental Sustainability Goals
e) Carbon Footprint Reduction f) Resource Conservation 133

ICT for g) Community Engagement Development h) Long-Term Environmental Impact i) Sustainable Tech Connect Check Your Progress: 2
1. ICT catalyses inclusive and equitable access to education, healthcare,
and essential services in developing regions. By overcoming geographical barriers, fostering connectivity, and providing digital solutions, ICT contributes significantly to sustainable development goals by ensuring everyone can access vital services and opportunities regardless of location. Check Your Progress: 3
1. For example, Aarogya Setu's best practices are exemplary, including
efficient contact tracing, sustainability in pandemic management, innovation in digital health solutions, privacy measures, community engagement, and integration with public health initiatives. The app demonstrates how ICT innovations can effectively contribute to public health, especially during a crisis, while addressing concerns related to privacy and fostering community participation. Check Your Progress: 4
1. The recent innovation in Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) that has significantly impacted society is the widespread adoption and advancement of 5G technology. 5G provides ultra-fast internet connectivity, significantly enhancing download and upload speeds compared to its predecessors. This has transformed how people access and share information, fostering a more connected society. 5G technology has profoundly impacted society, influencing connectivity, technological advancements, healthcare, the economy, and global interactions. Its widespread adoption marks a significant milestone in the evolution of ICT, shaping how people live, work, and communicate in the digital age.

ICT and Environment
Sustainability Block
ICT: APPROACHES AND APPLICATIONS
UNIT 9
ICT for Open Learning
UNIT 10
ICT for Disability
UNIT 11
ICT for Agriculture

I CT for BLOCK 3 INTRODUCTION: ICT: APPROACHES
Development
AND APPLICATION
This Block takes you to three domain-specific cases to understand the role of ICT in development. This Block covers education, specifically lifelong learning, disability, and agriculture as the sampled domain areas to understand the core thematic areas of this course. For any developing country, skill enhancement, supporting the marginalised communities and the role of technology in age-old human practices. With that understanding, this Block takes you to the three crucial areas within the context of technological interventions for empowerment.
Unit 9 - ICT for Open Learning. In this Unit, we will Unitore the dynamic
world of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) and their profound impact on open learning systems. From traditional classrooms to open and distance learning (ODL), ICTs play a pivotal role in shaping learning environments. We will explore the evolution of ODL alongside advancements in ICTs, examine current practices, and envision future prospects.
Unit 10 - ICT for Disability, where we will discuss the transformative realm
of ICT for Disability. This Unit explores howUnithnology catalyses inclusivity, empowering individuals with disabilities to lead more independent and fulfilling lives. From assistive devices to universal accessibility, we unravel the terminologies and historical evolution shaping this dynamic field. Amidst the current global reliance on technology, we uncover its pivotal role in bridging gaps and enhancing rehabilitation services. Also, this Unit discusses the present and future landscapes of ICT for disability, unlocking opportunities for societal contribution and empowerment.
Unit 11 - Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and
Agriculture. Farmers face challenges in adapting as our world evolves with market liberalisation and globalisation. This Unit explores the critical role of ICT in addressing farmers' increasing demand for timely and accurate information. We explore the growth of ICT, government support, innovative models, and the impact of ICT-based initiatives on agriculture. You will understand the constraints, challenges, and strategies for effective ICT utilisation in rural areas. This Block will enlighten you on the role of technology in specific areas that are considered important sections of any social setting.

UNIT 9 ICT FOR OPEN LEARNING ICT for Open
Learning Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Using Technologies in ODL
9.3 Generations of ODL and Technology Integration
9.4 ICT Integration in ODL
9.4.1 ICTs in Supplementary Role in ODL
9.4.2 ICTs in Complementary Role in ODL
9.4.3 Integration of ICT
9.4.3.1 Model Of ICT Integration
9.5 Present Practices
9.5.1 Teleconferencing and Radio Conferencing
9.5.2 Online Web-Support
9.5.3 Social Media Blending
9.5.4 App Based Support
9.5.5 SWAYAMPRABHA
9.5.6 MOOCs including SWAYAM
9.6 ICT for Administrative Support
9.6.1 ICT for e -Governance
9.6.2 ICTs for Assessment and Evaluation
9.7 Future prospects
9.7.1 Badges and Credit Bank
9.7.2 Rolling Admissions
9.7.3 Fully Online Programmes
9.7.4 Online Home-Based Assessment
9.7.5 AR and VR
9.7.6 Blockchain in Higher Education
9.8 Let Us Sum Up
9.9 Further Readings
9.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) have been integrated largely in today's education. From school to higher education, ICTs have their interference and utility everywhere in formal and non-formal education systems. Open and Distance learning (ODL) has also grown a lot along with growth in ICTs and has moved towards ODeL (Open and Distance e- learning). The present unit is an attempt to highlight the growth and development of the Open and Distance learning (ODL) system, ICTs, and ways of ICT integration in ODL. The unit will reflect on recent practices of

ICT: Approaches ICT integration in ODL and discuss future perspectives on technology
and Applications
integration.
9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Identify the role of various technologies in open and distance learning; * Enlist the transformational shifts in technologies across the generations
of ODL;
* Compare multiple models of ICT integration in ODL; * Examine the effectiveness of present ICT practices in ODL and * Predict the future of ODL with increasing ICT intervention.
9.2 USING TECHNOLOGIES IN ODL
Open and Distance learning (ODL) has undergone various transformations since its inception. The initial model of correspondence education in the early 60s was entirely different from the current ICT-driven model. If you go through multiple generations of ODL, you will conclude how ICT interventions have forced ODL to change itself and walk with technology. Due to greater flexibility in pedagogy, mode of delivery and inclusive nature of ODL, adaptation to the emerging ICT interventions is comparatively more straightforward here. As ODL deals with the education of the masses, it also opens opportunities to use a variety of media and technology. Go through various aspects of the ODL system. You will see that technology in ODL is not only limited to the delivery of content or increasing interaction with learners but also plays an equally important role in various support services, examinations, governance, etc. In the coming sections of the Unit, you will get an opportunity to explore all such aspects of ODL, where technology has made its place and has a window to adapt future technologies.
9.3 GENERATIONS OF ODL AND
TECHNOLOGY INTEGRATION
To understand the growth and development of the Open and Distance learning (ODL) system and how technology has been integrated into ODL, you need to explore the generation of ODL suggested by various practitioners. Generations of ODL have been indicated from three main perspectives: technology, pedagogy, and organisational (Aoki, 2012). In the present unit, the focus will remain on the technological perspective only. You all will agree that the term' distance' (used in the initial days of ODL) has been replaced and is being dominated by the term 'Open' now as it gives openness and flexibility and has filled the gap between teacher and learner using technology. Earlier discussions, such as Peters's (1994), have discussed three generations of ODL. This was the era before Web 2.0. In such discussions, the first generation was referred to the traditional correspondence education, where the printed text was delivered to learners using postal services, followed by a face-to-face examination. There was

hardly any teacher/tutor intervention. With the emergence of radio and ICT for Open Learning television, the second generation was started, where print had remained the primary medium of delivery along with some supportive role of instructions through radio and television. If we consider the impact of technology interventions, the two classifications suggested by Taylor (2001) and Moore and Kearsley (2005) seem more appropriate to discuss. Generations of ODL, as suggested by Taylor (2001) Taylor (2001), in his article' Fifth Generation of Distance Education', suggested five generations of open and distance learning. Figure 9.1: Generation of ODL (Tylor, 2001) * The classification suggested by Tylor indicates that in the first generation of ODL, the print self-learning material was the medium of instruction. Learners were using Print technology to read the content, and there was no/minimal opportunity for any interaction between learner and teacher. This was when the term 'correspondence education' was more popular. Dedicated open universities had not emerged, and many dual-mode institutions/universities were in operation. * With the entry of radio and television, the Second Generation of ODL started, and a shift from 'Correspondence' to 'Distance' education was observed. Technology integration has touched a new high with the experiment purposes radio and television has education. However, most of the time, the role of radio and television remained complementary or supplementary in most cases. Interaction with learners has started through counselling using these media. Also, the curriculum-based recorded programmes were broadcasted/telecasted. * The Third Generation of ICT integration belongs to the infusion of computer-based education in ODL. Computer-assisted learning (CAL) packages, using multimedia, CD-ROM, etc., have started to integrate with traditional print-based material along with radio/television. Television also moved from terrestrial to satellite-based telecast in this generation, which opened new avenues and made better reach possible. * With the advancement of web 2.0 tools, interactivity increases in the 139

ICT: Approaches Fourth Generation of ODL. Online content delivery started in this
and Applications
generation; online interactivity and two-way communication between teacher and learner were critical features. Another shift in this generation was that ICT has reached a more profound level, and its role from complementary/supplementary to ICT-based material has changed. * The Fifth Generation has seen a lot of influence from intelligent learning solutions. Online courses have started in this generation. Audio/video and e-text were all available in the same place in a dedicated web space. The open education resources (OER) movement has started. The use of social media to increase interactivity and support services has begun. If you go through the above discussion, you can see how technology integration has influenced the growth and development of ODL in every generation. If you read literature, you may find many other classifications of the generations, too. One such was proposed by Moore and Kearsley (2005). Here is its brief diagrammatic representation: Source: Heydenrych and Prinsloo (2010) Figure 9.2: Generations of ODL (Moore and Kearsley, 2005) This discussion about the use of ICT in ODL through different generations will help you understand that with the advancement of technology, models of integrating technology in ODL have also grown. After discussing various generations of ODL concerning ICT integration, it seems imperative that we discuss how ICT has been incorporated into ODL. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Technology for interaction was introduced in which generation of ODL?

2) What changes web 2.0 has brought in the ODL system? ICT for Open
Learning

9.4 ICT INTEGRATION IN ODL
When you analyse the ways in which ICT has been used with Open and Distance Learning, you will find that it has changed with time. Initially, it was supplementary; later, it became complementary, then integrated, and now Online. In other words, you can say that initially, there were ICT- supplemented practices; later, these became ICT-supplied, followed by ICT- mediated, and now, we are witnessing ICT-driven ODL practices. Let us discuss these one by one.
9.4.1 ICTs in Supplementary Role in ODL
If you go through the initial practices where ICTs were used in ODL, you will find that ICTs were not part of the core curriculum or pedagogy. Print- based material was considered self-contented and was the main medium of instruction. In the second generation, when Radio and Television emerged, audio-video programs were used to supplement teaching-learning. For a long time, there was a standard practice to develop one or two audio/video programmes on any topic of importance from the whole course curriculum and provide these to learners for additional learning materials. The course content in the text and audio/video was often similar. This was when many resources in programme production were not available with open universities/institutions. ICTs were also being used to supplement tutor- learning interaction in terms of radio-counselling or teleconferencing, but these practices were also additional to traditional counselling sessions at study centres.
9.4.2 ICTs in Complementary Role in ODL
In the third generation of ICT integration in ODL, practices changed. The importance of audio/visual material and interactivity has been accepted worldwide. ICT-based learning material has become an important part of pedagogy, and broadcasting has become an integral part of teaching-learning. Content planning has started considering the media and technology to be used, and there were experiments in ODL universities, where content developed using audio/video programmes and interaction through radio- counselling and teleconferencing have started complimenting the traditional print-based material. The chances of repetition of the content are reduced as, at the time of planning, curriculum developers started planning the content to be delivered through different media, but till now, the real integration was missing as audio/video and print material were delivering the designated content.

ICT: Approaches 9.4.3 Integration in ODL
and Applications
When you think about integration, you need to consider how it is different from the supplementary and complementary role of ICTs in ODL. Integration of ICTs in ODL means practices, where ICTs have become equal partners with traditional print mediums, and curriculum developers have started thinking, planning, and integrating ICTs within the curriculum and pedagogical practices. How to integrate ICTs in teaching and learning effectively is a key concern. Various models of integration have been developed by various researchers and practitioners. You need to explore a few important ones.
9.4.3.1 Model of ICT Integration
SAMR Model of Technology Integration
Image Credit: Lefflerd, CC BY-SA 4.0, Wikimedia Commons
Figure 9.3: SAMR Model The SAMR framework was developed by Ruben Puentedura to explain the ways of integrating technologies in teaching-learning. The letters "SAMR"
stand for Substitution, Augmentation, Modification, and Redefinition, in
which substitution is the lowest level of integration and substitution is at the highest level. Substitution If a tutor plans to replace the traditional print-based content with any ICT content, and it emerges as a direct replacement, this comes under substitution. For example, if in a unit of ODL print material, there are five important sections, the unit writer replaces one or two sections with a video, audio or web link and asks the learner to go through those resources. The self-check exercise and quiz are also linked with the ICT resource suggested. Sometimes, it can be a Word file, excel sheet or PPT. Augmentation This is also a kind of direct replacement but to enhance the learning experience by augmenting technology for enhancing productivity and potential of the learner. Here learners are asked to augment their learning with various web-links, video-clips, etc. so that they can learn better.

The important point to be noted in substitution and augmentation is that the ICT for Open Learning structure of the unit's design has not changed. These are to enhance the learning experience. In the next two levels, there is a shift from enhancement to transformation, i.e., for integrating ICTs, the whole unit/lesson design and learning outcomes also change. Modification Here, \ the whole design of the unit/lesson is changed along with learning outcomes, keeping in mind the learners and available technology. Sometimes, learners are also given the opportunity to create their own graphics, presentations, video/audio, etc, based on their experiences. Modification also helps contextualise the learning experiences. Sometimes, when learners are asked to present, they develop something new by using existing ICT resources and adding their own creations to it. Redefinition This is the highest level of the SAMR model. This basically focuses on strategies to transform learner's experiences by using technology. Curriculum planners and content developers give such a shape to the content that it seems impossible to complete the unit/lesson and tasks without using ICTs. A variety of ICTs are interwoven in the lesson design. It gives a unique learning experience to the learners. The use of a variety of ICTs helps to deal with learners with different learning styles, and teaching-learning becomes more inclusive.
TPACK Framework for Technology Integration
This framework was suggested by Mishra and Koehler (2006); they added
Technological Knowledge (TK) to the Pedagogical Content Knowledge
(PCK) model developed by Shulman in the 80s. The new framework is the
Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge (TPCK or TPACK)
framework. Mishra & Koehler (2006) define technological content knowledge (TCK) as "... the knowledge about the manner in which technology and content are reciprocally related". It represents the knowledge required to identify and select technology tools and resources in a particular content area. TPK, in essence, is the knowledge that helps teachers maximise a particular technology's affordances to support a pedagogical strategy or model. Mishra and Koehler (2006) describe TPACK as: ...the basis of good teaching with technology and requires an understanding of the representation of concepts using technologies; pedagogical techniques that use technologies in constructive ways to teach content; knowledge of what makes concepts difficult or easy to learn and how technology can help redress some of the problems that students face; knowledge of students' prior knowledge and theories of epistemology; and knowledge of how technologies can be used to build on existing knowledge and to develop new epistemologies or strengthen old ones (p. 1029).

and Applications
Image Credit: Matthew Koehler, CC0, via Wikimedia Commons
Figure 9.4: TPACK Model This model facilitates planners and teachers' having a holistic picture of all three aspects, i.e., Technology, pedagogy, and Content. All three dimensions are planned together to give learners better learning experiences. The nature of the content, the appropriate pedagogy to deliver the content, and the best technology available to deal with the content effectively are planned together in this framework.
TIM: Technology Integration Matrix
The Technology Integration Matrix(TIM) provides a framework for describing and targeting the use of technology to enhance learning. In this model, five levels of technology integration are suggested, i.e., entry, adoption, adaptation, infusion, and transformation; these levels are associated with five key interdependent characteristics, i.e., active, collaborative, constructive, authentic, and goal directed. To facilitate a meaningful learning

environment, these five characteristics and the five levels of technology ICT for Open Learning integration create a matrix of 25 cells, as illustrated below. Source: https://fcit.usf.edu/matrix/tim-descriptors/ Figure 9.5: TIM Matrix This brief discussion on various models of technology integration will help you develop your understanding of how ODL integration takes place in learning. The ODL system has also emerged with time and adopted multiple models based on the nature and requirements of the academic programme. To better understand the technology used in ODL systems, we will try to examine various practices worldwide. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the differences between ICT's supplementary and
complementary role in ODL?

and Applications

2. How does TPACK help in better planning and transactions of content in
ODL?

9.5 PRESENT PRACTICES
To understand the use of information communication technologies (ICTs) in open and distance learning, it is essential to know about the parties in the system. In the era of Web 3.0 technologies, the traditional blending of audio/video with print SLM or support from radio and television has not lost its relevance yet. It is being used effectively to facilitate learning in the ODL system. However, new technologies have also emerged and are being used to enhance the learning experiences of ODL learners. You can develop a fair understanding of these practices after going through the details of some of these:
Teleconferencing and Radio-conferencing
The use of radio and television for learner support is the key feature of ODL practices. If you look at the practices in IGNOU, Gyanvani FM Radio stations and DD-Gyandarshan as a television channel have proved their worth nationwide. Millions of students used the programmes available through these mediums to enhance their learning. Along with recorded programmes, these two platforms are used effectively for counselling. Teleconferencing Teleconferencing connects several users in different places electronically to interact through audio-video or computer technology. The technology is very useful in the ODL system as it links learners and teachers for teaching- learning purposes. In teleconferencing, there are mainly teaching ends and several learning ends. The teaching end is a studio with an uplink facility. In the case of Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), the studio of Electronic Media Production Centre (EMPC) serves as the teaching end, from where programmes are being uplinked to satellite and the learning ends are centres having downlink facility/DTH with television set as well as telephone talkback system. In the case of IGNOU, all the Regional Centres and several Study Centres serve as learning ends. Learners can also watch the live sessions from their homes as all major DTH operators carry its Gyan Darshan Channel, through 146 which the teleconferencing sessions reach them. Distance learners of IGNOU

came to these learning ends and interacted with the resource persons at the ICT for Open Learning teaching end. IGNOU has been using teleconferencing since October 1993. Figure 9.6: Teleconferencing at Gyandarshan
Radio Counselling
Radio is one of the most common and cheap media available in India. Though it started as analogue technology and operated on analogue modes using frequency modulation, it now uses digital technology. Messages through radio can reach millions of people at the same time. It is also being used to broadcast educational programmes for teaching-learning purposes and with two-way communication between the teacher and learners, popularly known as interactive radio instruction or interactive radio counselling (IRC). In the interactive radio counselling sessions, teachers/experts sit in the studio, and learners can interact with them using a tele-calling facility, web-based interactions, etc. "IGNOU's Gyan Vani (GV) FM Radio was conceived in 2001 as a network of educational FM Radio Channels operating from various cities in the country. With an aim to enhance and supplement the teaching-learning process, each GV Station has a 147

ICT: Approaches range of about 60 kms and covers an entire city/town including the adjoining
and Applications
rural areas." (IGNOU, 2020). Figure 9.7: Radio-Counselling at GyanVani

9.5.1 Online Web-support ICT for Open
Learning Along with traditional audio-video support, online web support has emerged as a good tool in ODL. It has decreased the gap between teachers and learners and enhanced the opportunity for greater academic interaction and administrative support. Websites, e-mails, and Google Groups are available to support the learners. Learning material on repositories like e-Gyankosh, online web radio Gyandhara, support through chat boats, e-conferencing, etc., are facilities that help learners a lot.
9.5.2 Social Media Blending
With social media's increased penetration and reach among learners, its educational use has become very prominent. WhatsApp-based support, Telegram groups, Facebook Live sessions, etc., are examples of increasing interaction between teachers and learners. These also help reach learners, resolve their day-to-day issues, provide content support, etc. Large groups of learners are sometimes given learning support/training sessions through these platforms.

and Applications
9.5.3 App Based Support
IGNOU and many other open universities and institutions have also started offering app-based support to learners. This helps learners have 24/7 support for facilities, content, etc. IGNOU has developed its student app, which facilitates learners' knowledge about their enrolment status, assignments, grade card status, etc. Similarly, it has also developed its e-content app through which anyone can access its content available with eGyankosh.

ICT for Open
Learning
9.5.4 SWAYAMPRABHA
In 2017, the Government of India launched The SWAYAM PRABHA project to facilitate learning through television. Currently, it is a group of 34 DTH channels devoted to telecasting high-quality educational programmes on a 24/7 basis using the GSAT-15 satellite. Every day, there will be new content for at least (4) hours, which will be repeated five more times a day, allowing the students to choose the time of their convenience. The channels

ICT: Approaches are uplinked from BISAG, Gandhinagar. NPTEL, IITs, UGC, CEC, IGNOU,
and Applications
NCERT and NIOS provide the content. The INFLIBNET Centre maintains the web portal. IGNOU also has four channels in the project and facilitates learning for learners from various schools of study/disciplines. One channel for state-open universities allows all state-open universities to telecast video programmes for their learners, even in regional languages. This project has a lot of potential to facilitate learners with television-based instructions.
9.5.5 MOOCs Including SWAYAM
MOOC is the new buzzword in educational scenarios now. It stands for Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC). MOOC has bridged the gap between ODL and conventional universities and given learners beyond any geographical or administrative boundary the opportunity to learn about will and choice. Many popular MOOC platforms, like Coursera, Edx, Futurelearn, etc., worldwide, and SWAYAM has emerged as an Indian MOOC platform. The government of India initiated SWAYAM in 2016 as a MOOC platform for Indian universities and institutions. SWAYAM is designed to achieve the three cardinal principles of Education Policy: access, equity, and quality. This effort aims to take the best teaching 152 and learning resources to all, including the most disadvantaged. SWAYAM

seeks to bridge the digital divide for students who have hitherto remained ICT for Open Learning untouched by the digital revolution and have not been able to join the mainstream of the knowledge economy. This is done through a platform that facilitates hosting all the courses taught in classrooms from Class 9 till post- graduation to be accessed by anyone, anywhere, at any time. All the courses are interactive, prepared by the best teachers in the country, and available free of cost to any learner. More than 1,000 specially chosen faculty and teachers from across the country have participated in preparing these courses. The courses hosted on SWAYAM are in 4 quadrants - (1) video lectures, (2) specially prepared reading material that can be downloaded/printed, (3) self- assessment tests through tests and quizzes and (4) an online discussion forum for clearing doubts. Steps have been taken to enrich the learning experience by using audio-video and multimedia and state-of-the-art pedagogy/technology. To ensure that the best quality content is produced and delivered, nine National Coordinators have been appointed. IGNOU is one of these. IGNOU has offered more than 100 courses on SWAYAM, ranging from certificate to post-graduate level courses. Many states open universities/ODL institutions have developed their own mechanism too to facilitate learners using various ICT facilities available with them. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Enlist the present academic practices of use of ICT in ODL?

2. What is the difference between SWAYAM and SWAYAMPRABHA?

153

ICT: Approaches 9.6 ICT FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT
and Applications
Along with academic support in ODL institutions, ICTs are also of great use for administrative support services. These can be categorised as ICTs for e- governance, ICTs for Examination, ICTs for material access, ICTs for networking, etc. Let us examine these one by one.
9.6.1 ICT for e-Governance
When we talk about ICT in e-governance, it involves activities like admission, record keeping, resource management, etc. In any ODL institution, there are activities like admissions in different cycles, course selection within a programme, study centre allotment, maintaining records of submissions, communicating with learners/study centres and parents, generating various certificates, analysing multiple data, etc., in which ICT plays an important role. In IGNOU, online admission, data management at regional centres, examination form submission, checking the status of submissions and certificates, etc., are the services that are available online.
9.6.2 ICTs for Assessment and Evaluation
In most ODL institutions, ICTs are used to fill out examinations, allot examination centres, download admit cards, etc. But now, the use of ICTs has expanded its horizon. Online delivery of Question papers, Online assessment of answer scripts, computer-based online entrance and term-end examination, Question bank, automated question paper generation, Learning Management System (LMS) based assessment, and computer-based marking are the areas in which ODL institutions have started moving.
9.7 FUTURE PROSPECTS
Till now, you must have developed a fair understanding of the ever-changing face of Open and Distance Learning due to technological interventions. As many new and emerging technologies are knocking on the doors of ODL, there are possibilities for including many new technologies. National Education Policy 2020 has also hinted at it and demands experimentation on new teaching-learning models through various institutions. Many have already started on a pilot basis; many are in the pipeline. The following

discussion will help develop a basic understanding of upcoming technologies ICT for Open Learning that can be part of ODL in the coming days.
9.7.1 Badges and Credit Bank
Badges and Academic Credit banks are the future of technology-enabled education. Many open universities, like UKOU, have already started the concept of badges. The National Education Policy 2020 in India has also advocated the establishment of Academic Back of Credits (ABC). Digital or online badges are provided to learners to help them accomplish a particular skill or course or attain competency. These badges generally talk about learners' proficiency levels in a particular area. As institutions give these and are available for verification by employers, these enhance changes in employability, too. These are great tools for professional development and life-long learning. As per recommendations of NEP-2020, UGC has rolled out a plan to establish the Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) to facilitate student mobility across the education system. It will bring more flexibility and openness in higher education scenarios. One learner can accumulate credits from any institution by doing a course. Once his/her accumulated academic credits become equivalent to a diploma/degree, he/she can claim that from an institution. This will bring a new era of collaboration and learning that will go beyond the boundaries of only one college/university.
9.7.2 Rolling Admissions
As the future of ODL is credit-based and course-based learning will be promoted now, a learner may not require admission at a particular time (like January/July). A learner can join any course at any time, complete it, and accumulate credit. Choices will be there for the subject domain as well as for timing. Anytime, anywhere learning, a motto of the ODL system, will be encouraged more. This will also open the opportunity for on-demand examinations. As a learner completes a course, he/she can demand an examination for that course. With the penetration of technology in the examination system, it will be possible to organise the computer-based examinations of any learner as per his/her choice.
9.7.3 Fully Online Programmes
Currently, most online courses are either single non-credit/credit or course- based learning approaches being practised and promoted. However, there are possibilities in the future of fully standalone online programmes with multiple courses. University Grants Commission (UGC) has already rolled out the norms of online programmes in 2020. IGNOU has started offering fully online programmes, from certificate to master's level. In the future, many such programmes will be offered. Experiments are going on for programmes that require hands-on or practical components, too; there are possibilities for such programmes also in online mode.
9.7.4 Online Home-based Assessment
Experiments in this new mode of examination have also started. With the use of emerging technologies, the present system of computer-based

ICT: Approaches examination, in which a learner has to go to a designated place/centre for a
and Applications
proctored examination, will also change shortly. There are technologies to detect the presence of any other person in the room, such as retina scan and eye movement, lip reading, face recognition, room temperature change with the presence of another person, etc. These technologies will be used for home-based online examination by integrating technologies in Artificial Intelligence (AI) based applications.
9.7.5 AR and VR
Augmented reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) are the future of online education. With the integration of AR/VR, the learning experiences will be enhanced for learners. AR/VR-based headsets will be the future of classrooms and ODL study centres. The AR/VR will enhance the learning experiences of the learners. In areas like vocational/skill-based higher education, AR/VR will be a great help. In fields like medical education and nursing, immersive technologies have already started. Vocational training in engineering and technology, as well as new media and art applications, are the areas where AR/VR will be in the future.
9.7.6 Blockchain in Higher Education
Blockchain technology is also an emerging disruption in higher education, which has its distinct benefits in ODL. "The most promising use case for blockchain in higher education is to transform the "record keeping" of degrees, certificates, and diplomas'' (Moore, 2019).

There are many benefits of Blockchain in education like improving record ICT for Open Learning keeping, improving employability and verification of records by employer, emerging as a new market of cloud-based storage, accumulation of badges and facilitating in earing diploma/degree, facilitating flexible and choice- based learning, reducing the cost of record generation, keeping, and procuring, etc. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Explore the internet and find out the emerging technologies which can be
used in ODL in near future.

9.8 LET US SUM UP
The unit has started with a discussion on the role of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for Open and Distance Learning (ODL) systems. ICT interventions have forced ODL to change itself and walk with technology. The discussion moved towards Generations of ODL, which have been suggested from three main perspectives: technology, pedagogical, and organisational. The unit discusses in detail two classifications of generations suggested by Tylor (2001) and Moore and Kearsley (2005). How ICTs have been integrated into the ODL was also discussed progressively. Modes of ICT integration, from supplementary to complementary to true integration, have been discussed. Some models of ICT integration, like SMAR, TPACK, and SIM Matrix, were discussed in the unit to give you an understanding of how ICT integration can help teach ODL learners. The unit has highlighted various present practices like teleconferencing, radio-conferencing, web support, SWAYAM and SWAYAMPRABHA, also in brief. ICTs are being used not only for academic support but also for administrative support in ODL. The role of ICTs in resource management, financial management, examination, etc., has been discussed in the unit. At the end of the unit, future possibilities of using ICTs in ODL have also been discussed briefly.
9.9 REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED
READINGS
1. Aoki, K. (2012). Generations of Distance Education: Technologies,
Pedagogies, and Organizations, Procedia - Social and Behavioral
Sciences, 55, 1183 - 1187, https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/ 82595361. pdf
2. Heydenrych, J. F. and Prinsloo, P. (2010). Revisiting the five generations
of distance education: Quo vadis? Progressio 32 (1), pp 5-26

ICT: Approaches 3. Hofer, M. and Grandgenett, N. (2012). TPACK Development in Teacher
and Applications
Education: A Longitudinal Study of Preservice Teachers in a Secondary M.A.Ed. Program, Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 45 (01), 83-106. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ991840.pdf
4. Mishra, P., & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological Pedagogical Content
Knowledge: A framework for teacher knowledge. Teachers College Record, 108(6), 1017-1054. doi:10.1111/ j.1467-9620.2006.00684.x
5. Moore, S. (2019, Oct. 16). 4 Ways Blockchain Will Transform Higher
Education, Smarter With Gartner, https://www.gartner.com/ smarterwithgartner/ 4-ways-blockchain-will-transform-higher-education /# :~: text=Improve%20record%20keeping-,The%20most%20 promising % 20use%20case%20for%20blockchain%20in%20higher%20 education, an%20intermediary%20to%20verify%20them.
6. Singh, N. (2018). ICTs for education management, BESE-135
Information and Communication Technology, SOE, IGNOU,
http://www.egyankosh.ac.in/bitstream/123456789/46325/1/Unit-13.pdf
7. Taylor, J., 2001, 'Fifth generation distance education', e-Journal of
Instructional Science and Technology (e-JIST) 4(1), 1-14
9.10 CHECK YOU PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Interactive technologies were introduced in the third generation of ODL.
2. Answer the question based on your understanding of section 9.4.
Check Your Progress: 2
1. In a supplementary role, ICTs supplement the teaching-learning on ODL,
mainly through print-based material. If a learner does not use the ICT support, he/she is not at a loss for content. In contrast, in a complementary role, the use of ICTs is planned so that content is developed using audio/video programmes, and interaction through radio- counselling and teleconferencing has started complimenting the traditional print-based material.
2. Answer based on your understanding of the framework developed while
reading about it. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Enlist based on discussion help in section 9.6.2. SWAYAM is an online learning portal on which various institutions
offer online MOOC courses for learners, whereas SWAYAMPRABHA is a bouquet of 34 DTH television channels to support teaching-learning. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Explore the internet and write the answer.

UNIT 10 ICT FOR DISABILITY ICT for Disability
Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 ICT for Persons with Disabilities
10.2.1 Terminologies
10.2.1.1 Information Technology (IT)
10.2.1.2 Assistive Devices (AD)
10.2.1.3 Assistive Technology (AT)
10.2.1.4 Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
10.2.1.5 Universal Accessibility
10.2.2 History of Assistive Technology
10.2.2.1 Benefits of Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
10.3 Present and Future of ICT
10.3.1 The Present Scenario
10.3.2 The Future
10.4 ICT for Various Types of Disabilities
10.4.1 Technology used at the Institution Level for Instruction
10.4.1.1 Online Education
10.4.1.2 Radio Programmes
10.4.1.3 Teleconferencing
10.4.1.4 Web conferencing
10.4.1.5 Mobile phone-based education
10.4.1.6 E-Resources
10.4.1.7 Television
10.4.2 Technology Used at Individual Level
10.4.2.1 Technology for Persons with Intellectual Disability
10.4.2.2 Technology for Persons with Locomotor Impairment and Cerebral Palsy
10.4.2.3 Technology for Persons with Hearing Impairment
10.4.2.4 Technology for Persons with Visual Impairment
10.4.2.5 Technology for Persons with Autism
10.5 Let Us Sum Up
10.6 Further Readings
10.7 Check Your Progress Questions: Possible Answers
10.0 INTRODUCTION
Technology has the potential to impact the lives of persons with disabilities significantly. It can enable them to compensate for physical or functional limitations and, as a result, enhance their social and economic inclusion in society. Technology helps persons with disabilities to live an independent life to a great extent. Assistive technology provides greater independence to persons with disabilities by enabling them to perform tasks they could not

ICT: Approaches accomplish or had much difficulty doing earlier.
and Applications
The recent pandemic has forced various people to use technology extensively. Only technology connects us to the outside world; most of us have been using it to compensate for physical contact. Many organisations/ companies have allowed employees to work from home. Schools teach children through technology at their homes, and NGOs provide the beneficiaries counselling and other online support. The rehabilitation services provided to persons with disabilities can be improved with the help of new advanced technologies. Considering the needs and demands of persons with disabilities, many new technological solutions exist. The effective use of these technologies can enhance the functional capabilities of persons with disabilities, and in turn, they can contribute effectively to society. This unit will discuss the various technologies useful for persons with disabilities.
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to * Describe the benefits and limitations of ICT for persons with disabilities; * Analyse the emerging trends related to ICT for persons with disabilities; * Discuss various types of ICT used at institutional level for persons with disabilities; and * Enumerate various types of technologies available for individual use for persons with disabilities.
10.2 ICT FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Various Governments, non-government organisations and individuals have taken initiatives to develop technologies after considering the needs of persons with disabilities. They have not only developed these technologies after research but have also adapted several technologies developed in other countries to suit local needs.
10.2.1 Terminologies
Several terminologies are used interchangeably for technology, so let us discuss some of them.
10.2.1.1 Information Technology (IT)
Wikipedia defines information technology (IT) as "The use of computers to store, retrieve, transmit and manipulate data or information in various forms".
10.2.1.2 Assistive Devices (AD)
The term assistive device has been applied to a wide range of highly specialised mechanical, electronic, and computer-based consumer tools that are now commonly used in rehabilitation and education settings.

10.2.1.3 Assistive Technology (AT) ICT for Disability
Assistive technology refers to any tool, item or product used to enhance, preserve, or increase the competencies and abilities of individuals with disabilities to their potential.
10.2.1.4 Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
Information and Communication Technology is a diverse set of technological tools and resources used to communicate, create, disseminate, store, and manage information. ICT is a technology that supports activities involving information, such as gathering, processing, storing, and presenting data. These activities increasingly involve collaboration and communication; hence, information technology has become ICT.
10.2.1.5 Universal Accessibility
Universal accessibility means making a device, product, website, or building usable to a larger number of people irrespective of their language, gender, height, or abilities, bringing the concerned subject within reach of a maximum number of people.
10.2.2 History of Assistive Technology
Assistive technology is a tool or a device that helps persons with disabilities in doing their activities and enhancing their capabilities; it can be a simple device or a technological tool that can help persons with disabilities. Let's look into the history of the development of assistive technology. We can say that in 1808, Pellegrino Turri invented the typewriter to help his childhood friend Contessa Fantoni in the early stages of blindness so that he could write with the help of it. Since then, many other attempts have been made to strengthen assistance for persons with disabilities. Louis Braille developed a language based on a tactile writing system for people who were blind in
1921. This language is called Braille. Braille has greatly impacted the lives of
persons with disabilities and has helped them tremendously. The invention of the telephone was also a big contribution to helping individuals communicate with each other from a long distance. This device was combined with a text telephone, a telecommunication device for people who are deaf or hard of hearing that enabled them to communicate with people from long distances. Televisions, remote controls, talking calculators, talking watches, speech recognition systems, etc., have made the lives of persons with disabilities easier.
10.2.2.1 Benefits of Information and Communication Technology
(ICT)
ICT has brought enormous change in the lives of persons with disabilities because of the enabling effect of technology. Now, people talk about the potential of persons with disabilities instead of their limitations, and they are seen as productive partners in every segment of society. Some of the benefits of ICT are the following.
1. Promotion of equal opportunities

ICT: Approaches 2. Improved communication
and Applications
3. Movement and mobility are increased.
4. Participation in the community is enhanced.
5. Increased independence in various spheres like home, school, college,
community, markets, workplace, etc.
6. Persons with disabilities become self-reliant.
7. Participation of persons with disabilities in the various activities at home,
school and workplace is increased, and the full potential of persons with disabilities is utilised.
8. Persons with disabilities feel self-motivated.
9. Persons with disabilities feel more accountable.
10. Persons with disabilities get more opportunities to interact and
communicate with others.
11. Self-respect and confidence of persons with disabilities are enhanced.
12. The use of technology helps in improving writing and organisational
skills.
13. Technology helps them learn through their preferred mode, i.e. visual or
auditory.
14. Technology facilitates the sharing of resources, expertise and learning
material among users.
15. The accessibility is higher when technology is used.
16. Employment opportunities for persons with disabilities are increased by
the use of technology.
17. Persons with disabilities can participate in sports and recreation with the
help of technology. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space given below for your answers.
2) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. Define Information and Communication Technology in your own words.

2. What is universal accessibility?

162

3. Name any two technologies developed to assist persons with disabilities ICT for Disability
in their early years.

4. List five benefits of ICT.

10.3 PRESENT AND FUTURE OF ICT
We adopted the rights-based approach in India after signing the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2006. The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016 has compulsorily adopted this approach and emphasised that the rights of persons with disabilities should be protected. They should be treated with equity and equality in each sphere of life. Consequently, it has been envisaged that all measures should be taken to ensure the full and effective participation of persons with disabilities in various places. We must respect their differences, accept them, and provide equal opportunities to live a healthy life. Technology is a great leveller for giving equal opportunities to persons with disabilities, as appropriate assistive technology enables them to work effectively. Persons with visual impairment can read with the help of JAWS software. They can access the online library through it, and the online material available in an accessible format enables them to do their studies or work. Similarly, there are other technologies available to persons with different disabilities. We will discuss them later in this unit.
10.3.1 The Present Scenario
Developing ICT for all kinds of disabilities is a huge task that needs research and innovation. In India, around 70% of the population lives in rural areas, which makes providing technological intervention for such a diverse group of people very difficult. After the enactment of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016, 21 types of disabilities have been identified, and most of the persons having these disabilities require assistive devices to help them in their daily living skills or vocational skills. Various initiatives taken by government or non-government organisations for research and development of assistive devices have contributed to improving the quality of life of persons with disabilities. They have not only developed technology for persons with disabilities but have also been able to adapt the technologies developed in other countries to suit the local needs of India. The government provides these technological devices to eligible persons without any cost 163

ICT: Approaches under the ADIP scheme; apart from this, these devices are also available in
and Applications
the market. Children with intellectual disabilities often like to use computers provided the software in the computer is suited to their slow pace. They enjoy working on it, and the technology enhances their capacity by gainfully engaging them through various tasks or games. Several games are available to provide them with instructions, such as simulations, demonstrations, problem-solving, and discovery learning. Persons with visual impairment find technology very convenient, as they can read, write, walk, or do various activities with the help of technology. Multiple technologies are available to help them in mobility, education, or daily living activities, i.e., smart cane, screen magnifiers, screen readers, Braille printers, Braille embossers, talking diaries, talking calculators, talking ATMs, etc. The telephone was one of the first technological devices developed for people with hearing impairment. Alexander Graham Bell invented the phone to help his wife, who had a hearing disability. Individual FM systems, Loop induction systems, speech processing software, computer-assisted remote transcription, captioning, and various alerting devices are available for people with hearing impairment. Similarly, there are numerous other devices to help persons with locomotor disability and cerebral palsy. For persons with autism, communication skills are critical, and there are few devices available to assist them. Nowadays, app-based support is also provided to persons with disabilities; Sense International India and Samsung recently developed a mobile app named Good Vibes for persons with deaf-blindness to help them communicate with their caregivers and family members.
10.3.2 The Future
In the last few years, there has been a revolution in technology. Artificial intelligence has been key to this sector, but when a technology is developed, very few companies think about the accessibility of this technology to persons with disabilities. It is high time that, as a country, we think about universal accessibility of the technologies being developed for various areas of life; inclusiveness of the technologies will enhance the capabilities of persons with disabilities to a great extent. If we take the example of persons with deaf blindness, there is hardly any device developed in India to support them. Persons with deaf-blindness have a unique condition - a combination of visual and hearing impairment. Although the degree of deafness or blindness varies, the combination of dual sensory loss leads to unique problems in an individual's capability for communication, mobility, and ability to access information. The technological intervention with the help of an app can allow them to communicate with their caregivers and family members. Keeping this in mind, recently, Sense International India joined hands with Samsung to develop a communication tool for the deaf-blind. This two-way communication app allows the deaf-blind to send and receive messages to friends, family, or anybody else through their smartphone. More

such initiatives must be taken to meet the needs of persons with various ICT for Disability disabilities. Recently, the world has witnessed the COVID-19 Pandemic, resulting in all educational institutions providing educational support to their students with the help of ICT. Mobile phones have been used extensively, and teachers use various platforms to teach children from their homes. Although our educational system was not prepared to teach the students through mobiles or computers despite all the difficulties, they have been doing this for the last few months. In this situation, it is very difficult for persons with disabilities and their families to cope with the lack of accessibility to suit their individual needs. This is the right time when, as a country, we think about the various needs of children/individuals with or without disabilities; the pedagogy also needs to be aligned to suit the needs of all children. There is a need to emphasise massive online open courseware (MOOCS) that can enable a person with or without disability to learn at their own pace or place. Gaming has also emerged as a powerful tool. Judicious use of accessible gaming will help persons with disabilities for leisure, personalised virtual teachers, automated assessment, and evaluation, etc. Mobile technology is also assisting persons with visual impairment, hearing impairment and other disabilities; more such initiatives largely need to be taken to develop universally accessible technologies for persons with disabilities. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space given below for your answers.
2) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. The rights-based approach means
Table: 2. Good Vibes app is developed by, and To help individuals with
3. Two technological devices beneficial for persons with visual impairment
are and
4. Loop induction system is beneficial for persons with
10.4 ICT FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF
DISABILITIES
ICT is used to support persons with disabilities; when it is used in educational institutions following the principles of universal accessibility, it helps students with disabilities tremendously, and they are included in all the activities of that institution. Similarly, when a website is designed with universal accessibility, the needs of persons with disabilities are ensured. When planning a course/lecture/discussion/visual aids/video tapes/printed material and practical/field work, accessibility for students with disabilities is considered. In that case, it helps in their inclusion and largely learning. Distance learning programmes that incorporate universal accessibility features help students with diverse needs to learn at their own pace. 165

ICT: Approaches Technology is used to provide accessible education to students with
and Applications
disabilities at the institutional and personal levels. This means the technology is used by a bigger system, i.e., a university or a college, to support the educational needs of students enrolled in various programs, including students with disabilities. On the other hand, the technology that helps an individual compensate for his or her limitation or restriction in one or more areas is used at the personal level. Let us discuss this in brief.
10.4.1 Technology Used at the Institution Level for Instruction
With the help of technology, education can be more open and accessible to all the students enrolled in a particular program, especially students with disabilities. With the help of these technologies, support can be provided to students with disabilities in their teaching-learning process.
10.4.1.1 Online Education
Online education is very convenient for students with disabilities as they can learn from the convenience of their homes, and the use of accessible software enables them to compensate for their inability. In online programmes, there is a scope to learn at a flexible time and pace. If students with disabilities are provided with accessible content, they will benefit greatly from it.
10.4.1.2 Radio Programmes
Various educational institutes use radio programmes to provide education. Some institutions have community radio channels, whereas others can access FM or Gyanvani channels. Students with disabilities benefit enormously from these programmes. IGNOU has a Gyanvani programme that offers interactive radio counselling to the students, which enables them to interact with their teachers at the ease of their home. Radio programs are not accessible to students with hearing impairments as they cannot hear the discussions. Students with speech impairment will also be unable to participate because of their speech problems. Therefore, while planning educational support for diverse learners, alternative modes for supporting students with other disabilities should be considered. In this case, students with speech and hearing impairments can be provided with a facility for live chats or support through telecommunication devices for deaf students.
10.4.1.3 Teleconferencing
Teleconferencing facilities enrich the learning experiences of all students enrolled in any educational programme, provided the needs of students with disabilities are considered before planning these programmes. To suit the needs of a diverse group of learners, the teleconferencing programme can be made in universally accessible formats. Captioning and sign language interpretation are built into a program, as well as live discussions and PowerPoint presentations.
10.4.1.4 Web conferencing
Web conferencing can also be planned by adding sign language interpretation, captioning audio recordings or descriptive captions/descriptive 166 narrations, etc., to suit the needs of individuals with various disabilities.

10.4.1.5 Mobile phone-based education ICT for Disability
Smartphones have become integral to everyone's life in this technological era. Judicious use of mobile applications can provide quality learning experiences to students with disabilities, as they can learn from their educational institute's mobile application-based content. IGNOU has also developed a mobile application, 'IGNOU e-Content', to enable the learners to access its learning material through their mobile phones. The learners can access their course material from anywhere at their convenience.
10.4.1.6 E-Resources
The availability of e-resources in accessible form is very beneficial to students with disabilities; accessible libraries having content in e-Pub format or other formats suitable for persons with disabilities are providing enormous support to students with disabilities, i.e. Sugamya Pustakalaya and Bookshare. IGNOU has also developed a digital educational resources repository of self-learning materials for its programmes. The e-Gyankosh repository has all the instructional material and video programmes developed by IGNOU and provides open access to all. E-Gyankosh is very popular among students with disabilities, regardless of their enrolment in IGNOU.
10.4.1.7 Television
Television is a powerful tool for educating learners with disabilities at their doorstep. Several educational channels provide learning facilities in subjects ranging from primary to higher education. Gyandarshan is one such channel in IGNOU that offers various programmes across all disciplines to cater to the needs of a wide range of viewers in higher education. It benefits the learners of the formal education system and other stakeholders. Learners with disabilities find it very useful for their studies.
10.4.2 Technology Used at Individual Level
Persons with disabilities use various technologies to accomplish multiple tasks per their needs. They are discussed here for the benefit of our learners.
10.4.2.1 Technology for Persons with Intellectual Disability
Technology can compensate for the functional limitations of an individual. Persons with intellectual disability should be introduced to the technology as early as possible. The teachers need to provide them with these devices in all settings, including home, school, work, and recreation. Because these children have limitations in their mental functioning, there should be consistency in the technology available, how it is used, and the instructional method for operating the device. When a child is being taught a new technology, their previous learning needs to be considered. The purpose of instruction is to provide them with interactive experiences to promote learning among them. Several instructional programs for children with intellectual disability are drill and practice, instructional games, tutorials, simulations, demonstrations, problem-solving, discovery learning, etc. Usually, persons with intellectual disabilities are provided with instructions with the help of technology. There are several technologies for daily living 167

ICT: Approaches skills for persons with intellectual disabilities, such as electronic planners,
and Applications
reminding them about the various tasks they must do at a particular time. When the child feels lonely, they can be given a talking doll or any other toy. Soothers are objects that help them to stay calm and engaged, i.e., electronic devices that can make sounds or anything as simple as a small soft toy or a small pebble that can be kept in the pocket. The video-based instructional system can help them learn functional life skills such as grocery shopping, writing a cheque using an ATM, etc. Technology for assessing children with intellectual disabilities has also been developed, wherein integrated assessment in detail and records of each child can be kept in the assessment tool. Media Lab Asia, in collaboration with C- DAC, has developed (Punarjjani) a software tool to equip teachers for the progress assessment and evaluation of children with intellectual disabilities.
10.4.2.2 Technology for Persons with Locomotor Impairment
and Cerebral Palsy
Cerebral Palsy is a group of non-progressive conditions of a person characterised by abnormal motor control posture resulting from brain injuries incurred during the prenatal perinatal or infant period of development. Due to problems in movement, these children face many problems in their lives. Many persons with cerebral palsy have slight impairment, whereas others have serious problems that cause them to have difficulty in performing even the most common task. Technological intervention will help them overcome these problems and live independently as much as possible. Persons with Cerebral Palsy with mobility impairment will need devices that can help them to get around. They can use these devices for their studies or in the workplace. A wheelchair is the main device for the mobility of children with cerebral palsy or locomotor disability. Nowadays, electronic wheelchairs are available at reasonable prices, better than manual wheelchairs. If the individual cannot use the wheelchairs, they can be modified with a provision of switches that come in a wide variety. Sometimes, they are shaped like a button, hand, or foot operated or operated by the waving of a hand, etc. These switches can be selected depending on the condition of the individual. The most common form of human communication is speech. Children with Cerebral Palsy, in some cases, are unable to speak, or in some cases, they are not able to communicate effectively with their speech. In this case, they may need a non-speech mode of communication as an alternative to spoken language. They need alternative modes of communication; therefore, a few alternative and augmentative communication (AAC) devices have been developed to use non-speech modes to support these students. AAC is an integrated group of components that includes the symbols, aids, strategies, and techniques individuals use to enhance communication. In this system, multiple communication components are available. Some of these devices have been developed indigenously, whereas others have been adopted from other countries. The devices developed in foreign countries are dedicated communication devices, alpha talkers, walker talkers, digital augmentative 168 communicators, canon communicators, voids, and board maker software. In

contrast, Sanyog, Gup Shup, pictorial communication software, Aditi, draw, ICT for Disability and voice output communication aids are developed in India. These devices effectively assist children with limited or no communication with their families and caregivers. Several other devices help children with cerebral palsy and locomotor disability in their daily activities. These include computers, mobile phones, voice recognition, switches, adaptive keyboards, touch-sensitive screens, and infrared sensors with pneumatic switches.
10.4.2.3 Technology for Persons with Hearing Impairment
Persons with Hearing Impairment are those with hearing loss, and because of that, they cannot process linguistic information through auditory channels with or without amplification. They may be able to hear some sounds but may not be able to distinguish words. Some other people may not be able to hear sounds at all. For these people, prompts such as alarms, beeps and spoken messages can be an issue of concern as they cannot hear. An assistive listening device helps enhance a person's hearing capacity. Apart from these devices, telecommunication devices have been developed to assist people with severe hearing impairment. As mentioned earlier, the first technological device designed for persons with hearing impairment was the telephone, which Alexander Graham Bell originally invented to help his wife, who had a hearing disability. The advancement of technology has led to the development of a wide range of modern assistive listening and telecommunication devices that help students with hearing impairment participate more effectively in various areas of life. Telecommunication devices allow users to use a keyboard to type and receive messages over the phone. Mobile phones are widely used to communicate through SMS or other messages. An individual FM system is used to educate persons with hearing impairment. It is an assistive listening device that improves the sound-noise ratio for one person by using a remote microphone near the sound source. A basic FM system consists of two units, a transmitter and a receiver and is like having an individual radio station that transmits and receives on a single frequency. These systems are useful in classroom lectures, restaurants, theatres, public meeting places, corporate conference rooms, and other large gathering areas. Sound enhancement technology devices transmit sounds from the source to the receiver by improving the signal-to-noise ratio. These devices are designed to deliver the sound directly to the listener, who has direct control over the intensity of sound. This technology enhances the auditory signal during group communication, one-to-one, or audio-video situations. Sound enhancement devices include FM, infrared, hardware, and induction loop systems. A hearing aid is an amplifier that helps the person listen to a sound with minimum distortion by increasing the intensity of the sound. The role of hearing aids is to increase the sound level so that a person with hearing impairment can detect and use auditory signals. A hearing aid is an electronic device that amplifies sound to a degree and in a manner that will enable a

ICT: Approaches person with hearing impairment to utilise remaining hearing capacity
and Applications
effectively. There are two types of hearing aids: individual hearing aids and other group hearing aids. There are technologies available for assessing hearing impairment in the audio lab. The software packages allow the users to record the speech signal and graphically add the same to prepare the test words. Some of the devices used for assessment are speech processing software, visual reinforcement audiometry, pure tone audiometers, speech audiometry, speech trainers, and visual aids. Several devices are available to provide support services for persons with hearing impairment in their daily lives. Computer-assisted remote transcription allows a stenographer to transcribe a meeting remotely. Captioning means adding text to a visual display that helps convert spoken words into text. In many programmes on television, captioning is available; live speech captioning is another type of captioning that provides accessibility to live programmes and speeches to persons with a hearing impairment. In an educational setting, this technology is very beneficial for students with hearing impairment as the speech is typed simultaneously by a stenographer, and the text will be displayed on a screen. Alerting devices listen to the sounds on behalf of persons with hearing impairment and draw their attention to the sound source by generating a visual signal. An example is a doorbell that makes a low sound and a flashlight; similarly, in a telephone, vibration or a flashlight is used. They widely use telecommunication devices for people who are deaf or hard of hearing to make or receive a phone call. These devices are generally attached to telephones, and they have a small keyboard for typing and a screen to display an incoming or outgoing message. These devices can be connected to a printer to have a copy of a conversation. To use telecommunication devices, the users must type the messages they want to convey; the written text will be automatically converted into speech and transmitted over the phone to another user. It converts the messages back into text form. These technologies are helpful for students with hearing impairment to interact with each other and other stakeholders.
10.4.2.4 Technology for Persons with Visual Impairment
ICT advancement has increased the quality of life of persons with visual impairment, and the application of technology has significantly enhanced their education. Modern technology has given unique experiences to persons with visual impairment to understand the unseen world through non-visual media. In this digital era, mobile phones, computers, iPads, scanners, and the internet have allowed them to fly out of their boundaries and interact with the world. They can obtain information on any topic with the help of the internet, which was earlier difficult for them to get either in Braille or from other sources. The availability of e-books, e-newspapers and e-resources has helped them tremendously. To reduce the limitations for students with disabilities, several efforts are required, such as curriculum adaptation, training in plus curriculum, and

providing modified teaching-learning materials and access to technologies ICT for Disability suitable for them. Several technologies help them with mobility, and they can go to the desired places without any dependence on others; some of these are
- white cane fitted with laser, sonic guide, touch traffic light signal, path
sounder, Mowat sensor, mobility assisting software and smart cane. All these devices help persons with visual impairments move around independently. Several technological solutions help persons with visual impairment in their education. These are - close circuit television, large print computers, screen magnifiers, screen readers, Braille embossers, referable Braille displays, optical character recognition, e-books, audiobooks, digitally accessible information systems (DAISY), text browsers, voice browsers, audio devices, Braille note takers, talking calculator, electronic Brailler, internet, mobile phones etc. Numerous technological devices help persons with visual impairment with their life skills. These are - the Braille printing system, handy Braille, talking diary, talking watch, talking toolbox, talking alarm clock, talking colour detector, talking measuring tap, talking kitchen scale, talking microwave oven, talking ATM etc. With the help of these devices, persons with visual impairment can undertake their daily living activities at home, in the workplace, in the market, in recreation centres, and the community at large. They do not need to depend on others for routine activities related to various areas. The need is to initially provide them with proper orientation and mobility training to be aware of their surroundings and the places they must frequently go. The devices mentioned above will help them tremendously in various settings.
10.4.2.5 Technology for Persons with Autism
Technology plays a very important role in the benefit of persons with autism. Autism is a developmental disorder characterised by a triad of impairments in social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication and repetitive interests or patterns of behaviour. It is a developmental disability that onsets in the early years and causes serious problems or delays in different areas of development in children. They cannot relate to others and may show abnormal interests in objects, may not maintain eye contact with others, remain aloof and asocial, resist change, and insist on sameness. Interventions for children with autism must be provided to enhance their verbal and non-verbal communication, social interaction, leisure, and play activities for their holistic development. With the help of technology, they can become participative and enhance their adaptive skills. Devices like talk pad, language master, voice output communication aid, audio taping, saying, autism my voice communicator, first then visual schedule, my pictures talk, Pocatello, speech journal, etc. are devices that help them in communication with their environment. A person with autism finds difficulty in focusing attention. As a result, learning becomes difficult for them. Technology helps them learn as they are often interested in and attentive to videos and the use of computers. The selection of appropriate technology will help enhance their academic

ICT: Approaches achievements; a few technology-based devices are video tapping, computers,
and Applications
LCD projectors, autism bundles, etc. There is various other software available for educational purposes. Persons with autism have difficulty in social interaction, and they pay less attention to social stimuli, smile and do not look directly at another person. They have significantly less or no eye contact, and the use of appropriate technology can help them to enhance their social skills; a few of them are - big mack, audio tapping, visual impact, symtrend ADL, tool factory beep, injuring child development game suite, sound beginnings and touch it transport etc. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space given below for your answers.
2) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. How can educational institutions provide instructions to persons with
disabilities by using technology?

2. Write two benefits of mobile phones for the education of persons with
disabilities.

3. Name any two devices used by persons with hearing impairment.

4. How will a video-based instructional system help persons with
intellectual disability?

10.5 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we discussed the various technologies used for persons with disabilities, various terminologies used interchangeably for technology, and the benefits of technology. We traced the history of assistive technologies and discussed the present scenario regarding the technologies in the country. We also discussed the future of technology for our country.

Technologies benefit persons with disabilities, and various educational ICT for Disability institutions use these to effectively support students. We discussed the various types of technologies that various institutions are using to instruct students and how they can help students with disabilities. Several technologies help persons with disabilities individually to accomplish various tasks. We discussed such technologies available for persons with intellectual disability, persons with locomotor disability and cerebral palsy, persons with hearing impairment, persons with visual impairment and persons with autism. To sum up, technology plays a very important role in the lives of persons with disabilities. It offers immense possibilities for their education and daily living skills. The use of appropriate technology can empower persons with disabilities and help them become productive members of society.
10.6 FURTHER READINGS
1. Broadband India Forum. (n.d.). White Paper on ICT Accessibility for
Persons with Disabilities. [White paper]. https://www.broadband indiaforum.com/images/WP_on_ICT_Accessibility_for_Persons_with_D isablilites.pdf
2. Frehe, P., & Hoppe, H. U. (2008). Enhancing Collaboration through
Instant Messaging Tools: A Language-Centered Approach. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, 3446, 17-26. https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3446/ Paper3.pdf
3. Global Partnership for Education. (n.d.). Bridging Divides: The Role of
Inclusive Technology for Learners with Disabilities. https://www.globalpartnership.org/blog/bridging-divides-role-inclusive- technology-learners-disabilities
4. International Telecommunication Union. (n.d.). Accessibility to ICT.
https://www.itu.int/en/mediacentre/backgrounders/Pages/accessibility-to- ict.aspx
5. Ranjan, A., & Luthra, A. (2021). Social Media and Mental Health during
COVID-19: Role of Psychological Capital. Information, Communication
& Society, 24(10), 1425-1440. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/
10.1080/17483107.2021.2008530
6. United Nations Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner. (2022,
May). Inclusive Education and ICTs: Factsheet. https://www.ohchr.org/
sites/default/files/2022-05/DigitalAge2_Factsheet_EN_ICT-Inclusive- Education2022.pdf
7. United Nations Sustainable Development Group. (2021, March 3). ICT
& Digital Accessibility: Brief on Disability Inclusion. https://unsdg.un. org/sites/default/files/2021-04/ICT-Digital%20Accessbility-BOS- Disability % 20Inclusion-Practice%20Note-20210303.pdf
8. World Bank. (n.d.). ICTs and Persons with Disabilities: The Global
Divide.https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/ core/bitstreams/ ef7fd554-8359-50f9-9718-7161545dbc54/content

ICT: Approaches 9. Singh, J.P. (2003). Technology for the blind concept and context. New
and Applications
Delhi: Kanishka Publishers, Distributor
10. Narasimhan. N. e-Accessibility Policy Handbook for Persons with
Disabilities: Based Upon the ITU-G3ict e-Accessibility Policy Toolkit
for Persons with Disabilities. Mumbai: Hemkunt Publishers (P) Ltd.
11. Hemlata (2014). Technology for Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities.
New Delhi: Kanishka Publishers, Distributors.
10.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Information and Communication Technology is a set of technological
tools used to communicate, create, spread, store, and manage information.
2. Universal Accessibility means a material website or building is made so
that many people can use it without any hindrance and will be equally useful for all.
3. Typewriter and telephone
4. By promoting equal opportunities, improved communication, and
enhanced community participation, persons with disabilities become self-reliant and their confidence increases. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Persons with disabilities are treated equally in each sphere of life, and
their differences are respected.
2. Sense International India and Samsung, deaf blindness.
3. Smart cane, Screen Readers
4. Hearing Impairment
Check Your Progress: 3
1. Educational Institutions can very effectively provide instructions to
students with disabilities through radio programmes, mobile apps, web conferencing, e-resources, teleconferencing, television programmes, etc.
2. i) Study material can be accessed from anywhere
ii) Students can be provided continuous support by the teacher through smartphones
3. Hearing aid and induction loop system
It will provide them with an interactive experience and will enhance their functional limitations to some extent.

UNIT 11 ICT FOR AGRICULTURAL ICT for Agricultural
Development
DEVELOPMENT
Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 ICT Perspectives in Agricultural Education
11.3 ICT to Strengthen Agricultural Research
11.4 ICT Perspectives in Agricultural Extension
11.5 Challenges in Agricultural Information Technology
11.6 Let Us Sum Up
11.7 Further Readings
11.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
11.0 INTRODUCTION
Information and better communication are critical requirements for sustainable agricultural development. Modern communication technologies, when applied to conditions in rural areas, can help improve communication, increase participation, disseminate information, and share knowledge and skills. A range of communication technologies have been used to meet the information needs of the rural population, including radio, television, newspapers, and books. Nowadays, the Internet is a new tool with the potential to contribute to rural development. The Internet enables rural communities to receive information and assistance from other development organisations and offers two-way communication opportunities. ICT can also support the bottom-up articulation of development needs and perceptions and thus help in reducing the isolation of rural communities with government planners, development planners, development agencies, researchers, and technical experts; encourage community participation in decision-making and help agricultural researchers, technicians, farmers, and others in sharing information. New information and communication technologies are generating possibilities to solve problems of rural poverty inequality, bridging the gap between the information-rich and information- poor and supporting sustainable development in rural areas. Agricultural ICT is the new global level wave. Private and public sectors engaged in agriculture, consultancy, marketing enterprises, hybrid plants, fertiliser industry, pesticide, seed, floriculture, medical plants industry, farm equipment manufacturers and drugs are developing Agricultural Information and Communication Technology divisions to provide new avenues and research output.

ICT: Approaches 11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
and Applications
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the significance of information and communication technologies (ICT) in agricultural education, research, and extension. * Analyse the potential of ICT tools and platforms in strengthening agricultural research, knowledge sharing, and community participation for sustainable rural development. * Identify and evaluate the challenges of implementing ICT in agricultural information technology and propose strategies to address them effectively.
11.2 ICT PERSPECTIVES IN AGRICULTURAL
EDUCATION
1. ICT to be a global agriculturist: Under the changing economic and
industrial growth dynamics, agriculture has to undergo changes with new approaches. Therefore, an experiential system in agriculture has a strong potential for imparting better training to agricultural technocrats with a high level of skill in combination with the modern outlook and management capacity. To prepare the agricultural graduates for the new millennium, the agricultural graduates should be given exposure to
International Agriculture, World Trade Organisation, Trade Related
Intellectual Property Rights, Global Conventions on Climate,
Biodiversity and Desertification, Computer Technology and Patent and
Trade Literacy. ICT can play an imperative role in giving exposure to agricultural students to be able to compete in the new millennium.
2. ICT to harness the frontline sciences: To facilitate agriculturists'
knowledge of the frontline sciences, there is a need to train them in the new areas of Biotechnology, Space Technology, Renewable Energy Management, Agricultural Economics, and agri-business management. ICT can provide opportunities to scientists and agricultural graduates who are trying to develop agriculture with the help of modern sciences.
3. ICT to generate job opportunities for agriculturists: With the
expansion of ICT in agriculture, ICT-related jobs could be provided to agricultural graduates. Governments, many NGOs, institutions, and private organisations have started to create websites related to agriculture for Indian farmers. In the creation of farmer-friendly content for agricultural sites, there is wide scope for agricultural graduates to be involved in this business.
4. ICT to make agricultural education understandable: Agricultural
education includes many sciences. The teacher must present them effectively to make education more interesting and help students understand difficult concepts easily. Many topics like pests and diseases of crops, deficiency of micronutrients in crops, viruses, pathogens, and many other topics cannot be taught with the help of lecture methods 176 unless coupled with the audio-visual form of presentation. Using ICT

through multimedia is the best solution to teach such topics to learners. It ICT for Agricultural Development is a system by which one can integrate the three senses: visual, audio and tangible. Multimedia, thus, involves the interactive use of images and animation (visual), speech, music (audio), text and data (tangible) on the same screen. Interactive multimedia is computer-centred, and with rapid developments in software capabilities, there are immense potentialities in professional education, especially technical and management education. Computer-aided learning using multimedia is likely to alter learning patterns significantly.
5. ICT to create Digital Agricultural Libraries: Libraries, which until
recent times were essentially stacking print material, have now begun to acquire electronic media like CD ROMs and multimedia packages. In the coming years, the quantity of electronic material is likely to increase substantially, and it is clear that libraries will have to prepare themselves for conversion to electronic libraries. Such libraries can provide much- diversified information as they make use of information highways and databases.
6. ICT for the Growth of Distance Agricultural Education: The major
problem faced by the people in most developing and underdeveloped countries is that they have less opportunity for higher education for various reasons. Recognising the need to provide them with higher education, many Universities have offered distance education. Some of the post-diploma and certificate educational programs on agricultural subjects can be run by distance learning. This can be done effectively by offering a learner-friendly way of learning higher distances through information and communication technology.
7. ICT for Online Agricultural Education: Online education principally
refers to teaching through the Internet or Universities and institutions that offer online courses on their websites. In this case, the students execute all the activities online with the help of the Internet, from taking admissions, attending virtual classrooms, downloading study material through email, and sending feedback through chat, e-mail, or videoconferencing on the computer, etc. This online education process has been made possible only through advancements in information and Communication Technologies. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space given below for your answers.
2) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. How do modern communication technologies, such as the Internet,
contribute to sustainable agricultural development in rural areas?

ICT: Approaches 2. What are the key roles of ICT in agricultural education, research, and
and Applications
extension activities?

3. How do information and communication technologies empower rural
communities in decision-making processes and development initiatives?

11.3 ICT TO STRENGTHEN AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
1. Research Priority: Under the changing global context, India will be
affected by the entire process of agricultural research. Identifying thrust areas of agricultural research will be based on global needs. The talent to differentiate between what is urgent and what is important will be key to success in deciding priorities.
2. ICT for Agricultural Scientists: Many innovative branches of science
are being used to develop agriculture. Meteorology, seismology, and biotechnology are good examples. Globally, biotechnology has been emerging as a frontline area of science. Agricultural scientists can use the database available with all biotechnology centres through ICT.
3. ICT to receive feedback for research: With the help of ICT tools like
the Internet, teleconferencing, videoconferencing, etc., the feedback of the technology users can be received to decide areas of modification.
4. ICT to avoid research duplication: Agricultural scientists can develop
inter-institutional relationships by connecting themselves through information and Communication Technology with other research institutions to avoid duplication of research efforts.
5. ICT for agricultural research evidence: Documentation is evidence or
information constituting an account of something that has occurred. It provides information based on the nature of various subjects of agriculture. The documents of the research record play a vital role in guiding and supporting other research workers. Two types of records can be made available on the Internet: textual and non-textual documents. Textual documents present their information exclusively in the form of written text to be read, e.g. books, periodicals, catalogues, statistical compendia, trade publications, patents, etc. Non-textual documents may contain some text, but the important part is presented in some other form, e.g. maps, graphs, diagrams, posters, paintings, photographs, slides, sound tapes, films, videotapes, artistic monuments, and magnetic documents. ICT can play a significant role in research documentation.

6. ICT in research announcements: Certain ICT intermediaries, such as ICT for Agricultural
Development Data Centres, Information Centres, and Libraries, allow the producers of agricultural information based on research to first disseminate information to pass on to the end users.
11.4 ICT PERSPECTIVES IN AGRICULTURAL
EXTENSION
1. To Strengthen Extension Management: Agricultural extension can be
managed effectively by five important prerequisites viz 1. Regular training and maintenance of extension workers and functionaries at various levels of specific knowledge and skills; 2. Monitoring and understanding constraints. 3. Strong information, documentation, and publication support; 4. Effective institutional network for synergetic support, 5. Develop national and international linkages. ICT can play a significant role in all these agricultural extension and management prerequisites.
2. ICT to strengthen elements of agricultural communication:
Agricultural communication is a very challenging job, where ample concern is required among the communicators to handle all communication elements. Many research studies have concluded that expected results do not come out due to a lack of skill in handling all the elements of communication. The use of the Internet can be very convenient in overcoming some of the barriers and strengthening the effectiveness of elements in the present system of agricultural communication, such as 'communicator', message, channel, treatment of message, audience, and feedback. There are other solutions for agricultural communication than the Internet, but it supports all the elements of communication and extension.
11.5 CHALLENGES IN AGRICULTURAL
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Farming, a major occupation for the majority of the Indian people, has encouraged the Indian Government to use IT for effective development in agriculture. Despite all these efforts and developments, serious challenges can be overcome if we implement reforms quickly.
1. Agriculture Information Professional Skills
The information society in agriculture lacks professional information skills. A few of these skills are the ability to add value to agricultural information, evaluate agricultural information, and organise and store agricultural information for effective retrieval by users. Also, awareness of technology skills and subject expertise, familiarity with research methods, agricultural knowledge delivery mechanisms and their management, and knowledge of legal, economic, and political aspects of agricultural information are important professional skills required in agricultural information society. Other challenges in agricultural information professionals' skills are methods of disseminating

ICT: Approaches agricultural information, IT-based agricultural messages presentation,
and Applications
editorial and publication skills and training, education, and consultancy skills.
2. Agricultural Information Management Skills
Agricultural information is considered the most significant resource, and that is why information is also treated as the blood of agricultural management in the context of decision-making. In the absence of awareness regarding various kinds of agricultural management, the information manager cannot enjoy the right benefit of the right information in the undertaken stage of decision-making. Hence, management skills are required by information professionals at various stages of the information cycle. These skills are of utmost importance, which may include understanding the agricultural organisational culture, agricultural project management, change management, agricultural strategic planning, agricultural financial management, human resource management, communication skills, marketing skills, vision, creativity and liaisoning, and negotiating skills.
3. Modern Knowledge of Agriculture Business
Information professionals in agriculture must keep one eye on the present and another on the future. He should not be confined to his subject. Still, considering modern agricultural technological innovations, the availability of better software development tools and better communication techniques, he must continuously update himself. Agricultural information professionals need to know present trends and developments in hardware, software and communication technologies, agricultural information exploration and visualisation, means of preservation of information, Internet, and its efficient use for quick access of desired information, and agricultural technology for intellectual property protection.
4. The challenges of information managers
Agricultural information should remain information rather than misinformation. Incorrect information may have negative consequences, damaging the entire plan or strategy. An agricultural information manager is responsible for creating a useful link between the farmers and the information. When information is mishandled or poorly presented, it loses its value, and the same may cause negative effects on the emotions of its users. To overcome such a situation, the information managers have to analyse the information-seeking behaviour, analyse the information-seeking behaviour, analyse the user's needs from time to time, be aware of the consequences of the misuse of the information and its impact, help the farmers learn the techniques for efficient retrieval of information. In addition to these, he should make the appropriate use of information in a suitable situation., keep a constant watch on the information flow within the agricultural enterprises, evaluate systems and procedures from time to time, review policies from time to time in the light of emerging trends, strike a balance between the existing needs

and changed needs of the system and take necessary steps to implement ICT for Agricultural Development the expected changes maintaining a balance between supporting and opposing forces.
5. Strategies to sustain
Nowadays, in the information age, we must implement the right techniques for storing, operating, and communicating the desired information with the resources of well-organised retrieval mechanisms. In this regard, the basic principle of reference should be "Right Information for the right user at the right time in the right form" The development of human resources in the information science profession needs to be thought of for the development of existing professionals into potential professionals. India has incredible prospects in software development. It must amend its policies for information dissemination from time to time considering technological innovations and user's changing needs. For survival in the information age, we need to establish an Information Service Committee to perform important tasks like drawing up the standards and labour division for database design, drawing up network plans and laying technical standards, identifying appropriate software and popularise their applications nationwide, determining standards and protocols for parallel effort in the labour division and cooperation for document acquisition and resource sharing and database contribution.
6. Information infrastructure
Infrastructure is the main component of every system. The same is also
applicable to Agricultural Information Systems. Information
infrastructure includes accessible networks of telecommunications, computing tools, libraries at organisations and state agricultural universities, information centres at the village level, and similar setups to transport, manipulate, store, and disseminate information efficiently. To determine future demand for infrastructure, it is essential to consider the efficiency of operations and how well the services generated respond to users. There are diverse and unique problems for each sector, and some of the common challenges of information infrastructure development in India are operational inefficiencies, inadequate maintenance, excessive dependence on public and external resources, unresponsiveness to user needs, meagre benefits to people with low incomes and lack of sufficient environmental responsibility.
7. Responsibilities of Development Agencies
Different agencies must come forward and help in their respective areas. Many agencies like the World Bank, FAO, IDRC, and IFAD support expanding Internet services. The Internet is the panacea for removing constraints to agriculture and rural development. Still, it brings all new information resources together and can open new telecommunication channels to rural and farming communities. It offers ways to bridge the gap between the agricultural development community and farmers through dialogue, interaction, new alliances, and interpersonal networks.

ICT: Approaches 8. Proper information policy
and Applications
There must be an ordinance of governance for every plan. Along the same lines, we should also have an ordinance of governance for information as the most important resource, an Information Policy. Information policy is a broad general plan of action to be adopted by an organisation or government. The legislature or the courts can enact such policies or emerge from international organisations and regulatory bodies. The main objectives of an Information Policy statement are to: * Identify the user's needs. * Intensify bibliographical control of all types of information resources. * Identify the information products and services. * Development of workforce * Standardisation in all the components of library and information centres * Promote international information cooperation. At present, there are hardly any national library and information services programmes for the development of library and information activities by the union government, state/union territory governments or other agencies in the country. As a result, existing programmes continue to develop uncoordinatedly throughout the country. This national policy can serve as guidelines for developing and improving library and information services in the country in the coming years. The Indian Information Policy must cover all user needs, information resources, manpower, standardisation, etc.
9. Intellectual Property Rights
Intellectual Property Right (IPR) is a general term that covers copyrights, patterns, registered designs, and trademarks. Developed countries demand protection against piracy, while developing countries feel that such protection will prevent the entry of newcomers. The new information society needs a free flow of information, while IPR is a hurdle. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) should treat the IT industry as a priority area and provide requisite facilities, viz. concessional tariffs, and subsidies to developing countries. This may help prevent piracy of IT products and provide global access to electronic information. Development in modern digital technology has led to a review of the provisions of intellectual property rights both at the national level and in many countries. Developing countries are also catching up with this trend as the value of intellectual property rights is increasingly felt. The following issues must be taken up in this regard: * Copyright regulations and legislation * Influence of Internet

* Problems and concerns in cyberspace ICT for Agricultural Development * Usage of digital signatures * Security of information over networks The Information Society is facing many challenges due to a lack of
information Professional Skills, Information Management Skills, and
Up-to-date Subject Knowledge. Making available proper information infrastructure, information management techniques, and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) will certainly make the Information Society of the 21st century a grand success. We must carry out the suggested strategies to ensure the survival of tomorrow's information society. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space given below for your answers.
2) Check your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. What are the challenges associated with implementing ICT in
agricultural information technology, and how can they be effectively addressed?

2. How does ICT contribute to bridging the gap between information-rich
and information-poor communities in rural areas?

3. How can ICT tools and platforms be leveraged to enhance community
participation and engagement in sustainable agricultural development?

11.6 LET US SUM UP
ICT-based agricultural information is slowly but surely building up. Policymakers still have a lot of work to do. Many organisations are supporting SAUs in digitising their technical information on the Web. At the same time, research and training organisations, both in public and voluntary sectors, are being supported in building their capacity to digitise the rural and agricultural information and make it available on the WWW. Efforts are being made to connect various districts of our country to the Internet so that the farmers can get all the technical information on the Web sites. If ICT is made available to all Indian villages to benefit from agricultural research, a positive change in the face of rural development will be possible.

ICT: Approaches 11.7 FURTHER READINGS
and Applications
1. Chaudhuri, B., & Kendall, L. (2021). Collaboration without consensus:
Building resilience in sustainable agriculture through ICTs. The Information Society, 37(1), 1-19.2. Mahant, M., Shukla, A., Dixit, S., & Patel, D. (2012). Uses of ICT in
Agriculture. International Journal of Advanced Computer Research, 2(1),
46. https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=eef1a 7c053cbf6b783734f69448e5fdeea24d483
3. Saidu, A., Clarkson, A. M., Adamu, S. H., Mohammed, M., & Jibo, I.
(2017). Application of ICT in agriculture: Opportunities and challenges in developing countries. International Journal of Computer Science and Mathematical Theory, 3(1), 8-18. https://www.iiardjournals.org/get/IJCSMT/VOL.%203%20NO.%201%2 02017/Application%20of%20ICT.pdf
4. Singh, S., Ahlawat, S., & Sanwal, S. (2017). Role of ICT in Agriculture:
Policy implications. Oriental Journal of Computer Science and
Technology, 10(3), 691-697. https://www.computerscijournal.org/ vol10no3/role-of-ict-in-agriculture-policy-implications/
5. Spielman, D., Lecoutere, E., Makhija, S., & Van Campenhout, B. (2021).
Information and communications technology (ICT) and agricultural extension in developing countries. Annual review of resource economics, 13, 177-201.6. Tiwari, S. P. (2022). Information and communication technology
initiatives for knowledge sharing in agriculture. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08649. https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2202/2202.08649.pdf
11.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1:
1. Modern communication technologies, including the Internet, facilitate
improved communication, increased participation, information dissemination, and knowledge sharing in rural areas. These technologies enable rural communities to access information from various sources, connect with development organisations, and engage in two-way communication. They also support the bottom-up articulation of development needs, reducing the isolation of rural communities and fostering collaboration with government planners, development agencies, and technical experts. The Internet, in particular, offers opportunities for community participation in decision-making and enhances information sharing among agricultural stakeholders. Overall, modern communication technologies play a crucial role in addressing rural poverty, reducing inequality, and promoting sustainable development in agricultural sectors.

2. ICT plays a pivotal role in agricultural education by providing access to ICT for Agricultural
Development educational resources, facilitating distance learning programs, and enhancing interactive learning experiences. In agricultural research, ICT tools and platforms strengthen knowledge sharing, data collection, analysis, and dissemination, thereby accelerating research outcomes and innovation. Additionally, ICT supports agricultural extension activities by enabling the delivery of timely information, advisory services, and training to farmers, extension workers, and rural communities. Through ICT, extension services can reach remote areas, promote best practices, and foster community engagement for sustainable agricultural development.
3. Information and communication technologies (ICT) empower rural
communities by facilitating access to information, fostering communication channels, and enabling participation in decision-making processes and development initiatives. ICT platforms provide rural residents with valuable resources, such as agricultural knowledge, market information, and government policies, empowering them to make informed decisions about their livelihoods. Furthermore, ICT enables two-way communication between rural communities and various stakeholders, including government agencies, development organisations, and technical experts, fostering dialogue, collaboration, and collective action. By leveraging ICT, rural communities can articulate their development needs, voice their concerns, and actively contribute to shaping policies and programs that address their priorities and aspirations. Check Your Progress 2:
1. Implementing ICT in agricultural information technology faces several
challenges, including limited infrastructure, inadequate technical skills, low digital literacy levels, and affordability issues in rural areas. Additionally, concerns regarding data privacy, cybersecurity, and sustainability hinder ICT adoption in agriculture. To address these challenges effectively, stakeholders need to invest in expanding ICT infrastructure, providing training programs to enhance digital skills among agricultural stakeholders, and promoting awareness campaigns to improve digital literacy rates. Moreover, collaborative efforts between governments, private sector entities, and development agencies are essential to ensure equitable access to affordable ICT solutions and overcome barriers to adoption. By addressing these challenges comprehensively, ICT can unleash its full potential in transforming agricultural systems and promoting sustainable rural development.
2. Information and communication technologies (ICT) play a crucial role in
bridging the gap between information-rich and information-poor communities in rural areas by providing access to valuable resources and knowledge. Through ICT platforms, rural residents can access a wide range of information related to agriculture, market trends, weather forecasts, and government schemes, empowering them to make informed decisions about their farming practices and livelihoods. Moreover, ICT

ICT: Approaches facilitates knowledge sharing and capacity building initiatives, enabling
and Applications
information-poor communities to learn from best practices and innovative solutions adopted by their counterparts. By reducing information asymmetry, ICT fosters inclusivity, empowerment, and socio-economic development in rural areas, ultimately bridging the digital divide and promoting equitable access to opportunities and resources.
3. ICT tools and platforms offer various opportunities to enhance
community participation and engagement in sustainable agricultural development initiatives. Firstly, digital platforms can facilitate interactive communication channels, allowing stakeholders to exchange ideas, share experiences, and collaborate on projects. Secondly, mobile applications and online forums can enable farmers and rural residents to access extension services, market information, and training materials, promoting continuous learning and capacity building. Thirdly, ICT- enabled participatory approaches, such as crowdsourcing and citizen science initiatives, empower communities to contribute data, insights, and feedback, thereby co-creating knowledge and informing decision- making processes. By leveraging ICT, stakeholders can harness the collective intelligence and creativity of rural communities, fostering ownership, inclusivity, and sustainability in agricultural development efforts.

ICT for Agricultural
Development Block
FUTURE OF ICT4D
UNIT 12
Characteristics of Knowledge Society
UNIT 13
Knowledge Society: Developing Countries Perspectives
UNIT 14
E-Governance Policy and Framework

I CT: Approaches BLOCK 4 INTRODUCTION: FUTURE OF ICT4D
and Applications
The first three blocks of this course gave a holistic view of the broad spectrum of technological interventions in diverse domain areas. This Block takes you to understand the efforts of various stakeholders in building a knowledge society. What are the opportunities and challenges of creating or strengthening the information society or knowledge society from the developing countries' perspectives? You will understand this focus area through the following units.
Unit 12 - Information/Knowledge Society Characteristics. In this unit, we
explain the institutional concepts and dynamics shaping our modern world, driven by information. We will explore the essence of information and its evolution into a knowledge-based society. You will understand the distinctions between key terms such as data, knowledge, and wisdom and grasp their unique roles in shaping our understanding of the world. From exploring the information transfer chain to dissecting the emergence of information and knowledge societies, this Unit offers a comprehensive view of our interconnected digital age.
Unit 13 - Knowledge Society--Developing Countries Perspective.
Throughout history, human progress has hinged on knowledge, shaping our understanding of the world, and driving societal evolution. In this Unit, we explore the transformative impact of the Information Society and its emergence. From exploring the dynamics of information economies to dissecting the digital divide, we aim to equip you with insights into the complex interplay between technology, economics, and development.
Unit 14 - E-Governance Policy and Framework. In this Unit, we will
explore the dynamic landscape of e-governance, unravelling its intricacies and significance. Also, this Unit covers concepts of Information Technology and Information System Management and the foundation for understanding e-governance workings. Through in-depth discussions on various models, projects, and partnerships, you will learn the complexities and potentials of e- governance in our modern world. Technology is always a powerful tool, but it needs to be integrated into any societal segment from a holistic approach, considering the various roles and capacities of stakeholders. The success of leveraging technology interventions is based on the broad integration of resources in this process. This course will help you understand the nuances of this relationship.

UNIT 12 INFORMATION / KNOWLEDGE Information /
Knowledge Society:
SOCIETY: CHARACTERISTICS Characteristics
Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 Basic Concepts: Information and Other Related Concepts
12.3 Definitions and Interpretations
12.3.1 News
12.3.2 Data
12.3.3 Information
12.3.4 Knowledge
12.3.5 Wisdom
12.4 Information Generation Process
12.4.1 Research and Development
12.4.2 Survey and Census
12.4.3 Government Activities
12.5 Information Transfer
12.5.1 Information Transfer Chain
12.6 Information Types, Requirements and Users
12.6.1 Information for Education
12.6.2 Information for Entertainment
12.6.3 Transaction type of Information
12.6.4 Problem Solving or Decision Support Information
12.6.5 Information Users and Their Requirements
12.6.6 Information and its Impact on Society
12.7 Information Society
12.7.1 Definitions and Meaning of Information Society
12.7.2 Factors Determining the Arrival of Information Society
12.7.3 Different Perceptions of Information Society
12.8 Knowledge Society
12.8.1 Definition of Knowledge Society
12.8.2 Features of Perfect Knowledge Society
12.8.3 Developing Countries
12.9 Let Us Sum Up
12.10 Further Readings
12.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answer
12.0 INTRODUCTION
Information has long played, in one fashion or another, a key role in society. We are all consumers of Information. "If physically we are what we eat,

Future of ICT4D mentally we must be the Information we have absorbed." Access to information affects our lives in ways that range from economic well-being to privacy rights, from workplace management and monitoring to policy decisions and daily wants to transnational business. With the growth of interactive media and Internet communication, access questions assume greater importance. Access can be understood from the perspective of those without access to information. Information is generated from all human activities and achievements. Both individuals and corporate bodies are engaged in creating information for some purpose or another. For example, Research and Development activities generate new information, which is used as the basis for bringing forth more information. Likewise, a state (country) with its organs of the legislature, executive and judiciary, business and industry produces large quantities of information, contributing greatly to its growth. In this Unit, we shall examine the concept and meaning of information and try to understand related terms such as data, knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom. These words are often used interchangeably in common parlance, although each is different in meaning and use. The Unit explains this aspect with examples. After determining the information needs of a wide range of users, the information transfer process from generators to users is discussed. The Unit also introduces you to the pervasive nature of information, emphasising its societal significance. It narrates the expansion of modern society into an "Information Society". The factors that have brought about a move from an "Information poor" to an "Information-rich" society are discussed, highlighting their importance. The changing image of an "Information Society" into a "Knowledge-based Society" is explained by its significant characteristics. To make the contents of this Unit easy for the learners and enhance its utility as a learning tool, self-check exercises with brief answers are provided in the Unit.
12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the concept of Information and explain the meaning of the term; * know the related terms to Information such as News, Data, Knowledge, and Wisdom and explain the difference which exists between these concepts and the fact that they cannot be used interchangeably; * understand that different activities of individuals as well as institutions contribute to the generation and growth of Information; * explain the 'Information Transfer Chain' and the different groups (stakeholders) involved in the transfer process; * distinguish different Information types, users, and their requirements; 190 * comprehend the importance of Information and its social impact;

* know the meaning of the concept 'Information Society' and the main Information / Knowledge Society: factors which contribute to its formation; and Characteristics * Explain what constitutes a knowledge-based society and its criteria and chief characteristics.
12.2 BASIC CONCEPTS: INFORMATION AND
OTHER RELATED CONCEPTS
In this section, let us discuss Information and its related concepts, such as news, data, intelligence, knowledge, and wisdom. It may be noted that despite the importance of information to human welfare, information as "a concept" remains shrouded in loosely defined terminology. The term information has several meanings and is used in several contexts. It is one of the more overused words in the English language. Hence, people have a surprising range of ideas on what information is! Even dictionaries cannot agree on one definition. This diversity in the common usage of the term is because information is essentially intangible. We encounter it only operationally through its subjective effects. Though the layperson uses information and data interchangeably with the information professionals, the distinction between these terms is important. Knowing the precise meaning of information is necessary in library and information science. First, Let us understand the meaning and definitions provided in important dictionaries and identify any commonality between them. i) The Oxford English Dictionary defines it as "that of which one is appraised or told; intelligence, news". ii) The New Webster Dictionary of English Language, 1984 defines information as "News or intelligence communicated by word or in writing; facts or data; knowledge derived from reading or instruction gathered in any way." iii) Random House Dictionary of English Language 1983 states that information is "Knowledge communicated or received concerning a particular fact or circumstances; any knowledge gained through communication, research, instruction." The RHDEL has also listed two sets of words that are used synonymously with the term information: i.)
Data, Facts, Intelligence, Advice and ii.) Information, Knowledge,
Wisdom. The following points can be inferred from the above: i) the terms news, data and knowledge contained in the above definitions are relevant to the context of library and information services; ii) these terms are related to the term information; iii) information is communicated by word of mouth or in writing; and or iv) information is derived from reading or instruction or gathered in any other way. In other words, these statements imply that some people are engaged in communicating information while others are involved in its generation and

Future of ICT4D use. Hence, there are generators, communicators, and users of information. In the following paragraphs, let us understand some definitions and interpretations related to the concepts discussed earlier.
12.3 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
12.3.1 News
It is one of the terms related to information. News contains nascent or current information. It primarily relates to events occurring worldwide and is said to be more episodic and short-lived.
12.3.2 Data
There are numerous definitions of data in the literature. While it is recognised that there are differences between data, information and knowledge, there are no generally accepted definitions, and the boundaries between them depend on the author's perspective. Let us examine what data is and try to understand methods or procedures relating to data conversion into information. "data" refers to "an individual fact, statistic, or a piece of information, or a group or body of facts, statistics or the like." [Random House Dictionary]. In broad terms, data refers to descriptions of actual states of entities. In other words, it could be a set of facts, events, measurements, opinions, or value judgments, which, as passive descriptive data, comprise the database from which information is derived. Data may describe the performance of a machine, physical process, social group, or business or represent the responses to questions concerning attitudes to a particular matter at a given time. The distinction between data and information could be equated with that between a raw material and a manufactured product. Information can be derived from data when interpreted to produce meaning. Therefore, the interpreter must possess the skills to undertake such a task, and the data available must be appropriate to the user's requirements. The extent to which data becomes meaningful as information depends on the skills of the recipient and the extent to which he can interpret and apply data. In other words, it must be stated that when data are stored, grouped, analysed, and interpreted, they become information. Information is also derived from data when the latter is used as part of the process, where only a part of available data will be converted to information. Some suggest that information is "smoothed" instead of "raw" data. Smoothing allows users to make decisions more easily than possible with unsmoothed data. Data may exist in different forms: symbols, letters, tables, pictures, graphs, histograms, etc. The following examples will be helpful to understand the difference between data and information: i) The Meteorological Department is responsible for daily atmospheric data collection on weather conditions. These data are presented in quantitative terms, e.g., tables containing rainfall or temperature figures over a period relating to different regions. Such data would be useful to the pilot of an aircraft. He/she may prefer a brief forecast of the weather conditions

based on the tables, which would indicate to him/her whether he/she Information / Knowledge Society: would face air turbulence on the route. The processed and interpreted Characteristics data in the form of weather forecasts becomes information for him/her. ii) A scientist studying the behaviour of a chemical compound under different physical conditions would observe and record the relevant data provided by the experiments. These data are raw facts and would not convey meaning unless the scientist filters, analyses, integrates, and finally interprets his/her findings. The resultant product then becomes information. In this way, many examples may illustrate how data becomes information.
12.3.3 Information
"Information is a core term for librarianship and has multiple meanings and different perceptions. In this section, we shall attempt to understand why it is impossible to furnish a single definition for the concept that would satisfy everyone, and the definitions we come across in the literature are contextual in nature and confined to a specific situation or perception. Therefore, it is the writer's responsibility to clearly indicate the intended meaning of the term information. We shall try to analyse some of the definitions available in the literature and understand their significance. Let us start with a broad definition of the term: "Information may be defined as the factual data, ideas and other knowledge emanating from any segment of society that are identified as being of value, sometimes gathered regularly, organised in some fashion, transmitted to others and used in some meaningful fashion." This definition is by no means meant as an attempt to define the field narrowly or to exclude other definitions. There is a need to consider every aspect of the term, every component of information, to allow others leeway in defining and using the term and, above all, to be as inclusive as possible." Any definition that serves as a basis for the study of information must consider everything relating to the creation, development, organisation, distribution or transmission, receipt, use, and preservation of information. If the above requirements are fulfilled, such a definition will greatly benefit library and information workers. Now, we will consider some definitions that suit specific disciplines and contexts. Many information scientists accept the definition "Information is data which is used in decision making." (Yovits & Ernst, 1969) This definition has several significant derived implications. One is that information is relative quantity- relative to the situation, the time the decision is made, and the decision maker's background. What is important in one situation may not be useful in another. Also, the information valuable to one decision-maker at a particular time may be useless to another or even to the same decision-maker at a different time or situation. Paisley (1980) suggests two ways of defining information: structurally and functionally. Structurally speaking, information is "an encoding of symbols (for example, letters, numbers, pictures, etc.) into a message communicated through any channel." Functionally speaking, in terms of what it does, Paisley suggests that information denotes "any stimulus that alters

Table: Future of ICT4D cognitive structure in the receiver, something that the receiver already knows is not information. In other words, information is what changes us. Paisley also adds that "information varies in quality, depending on its relevance, timeliness, comprehensiveness, and authoritativeness. Its value depends on not only its quality but also its specificity (distinctness of representation), locality (distinctness of location), equitability (ease of acquisition, including cost) and usability (suitability of form and content for intended use). In other words, much information is of no or low value to particular individuals at any one time. Therefore, we are obliged to develop selectivity. The UNISIST 1979 document provides a very comprehensive but somewhat difficult definition for the concept information, which is worth noting. According to this UNESCO document, "Information is made up of symbolic elements, communicating scientific and technical knowledge, irrespective of their nature (numerical, textual, graphic, etc.), material carriers (paper print, microform, or machine-readable form) form of presentation, etc. It refers both to the substance or contents of documents and to the physical existence; the term is also used to designate both the message (substance and form) and its communication (act)." Many significant works now deal with defining and understanding the term information and its many uses and nuances. These are essential not only to an understanding of the term's meaning and various disciplines but also to understanding the history of information. Only a few such works have been referred to in the above discussion to illustrate the point.
12.3.4 Knowledge
Knowledge is an organised statement of facts or ideas presenting a reasoned judgement or an experimental result, which is transmitted to others through a communication medium in some systemic form. Knowledge is subjective and is processed according to a point of view. Knowledge consists of new judgments (i.e., Research and Scholarship) or presentation of older judgments as exemplified in textbooks, teaching, and learning, and collected as library and archival materials. It must be clear from the above descriptions of data, information, and knowledge that these concepts are interrelated in the sense that one is the building block of the other. In other words, data is the building block for information, and information is the building block for knowledge. Much of the confusion arises because these distinctions are ignored in common and popular usage of these words. They are used interchangeably, and information often stands for knowledge or data. However, as library and information professionals, we must understand their distinctions and interrelationships and serve them according to the users ' needs. Data, information, knowledge, and wisdom are the goods acquired and perfected by the mind. They are not of equal value in terms of utility and application. Rather, they ascend in the scale of values, with data having the 194 least value and wisdom the greatest. These concepts constitute valuable

intellectual assets and are the most precious human capital in all development Information / Knowledge Society: processes. Characteristics
12.3.5 Wisdom
Wisdom is an individual trait that comes to one through acquiring sound knowledge and related values based on age and experience. This trait, among others, comprises the ability to see far ahead into the future, have a vision of things to come, and make judgments in selecting the right alternatives, among several others available for making a decision. While wisdom is the highest form of knowledge, it cannot be transferred; it is only acquired. Wisdom comes with the application of knowledge. To conclude, data, information, knowledge, and wisdom can be viewed as a part of a continuum with no clear boundaries. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1) Explain the difference between the concepts of data, information, and
knowledge.

12.4 INFORMATION GENERATION PROCESS
In the earlier sections of this Unit, we learned about the concept of information and its related concepts of data, knowledge, and wisdom. We have understood that "information" is all-pervasive, a basic resource/ commodity, power, etc. In this section, we shall try to know: i) How is information acquired or generated? ii) Who are the producers of information? iii) Who are its users? and iv) How does it reach from the place of its generation to its place of use? As has already been stated, information is the product of different human activities and events. Individuals or organisations undertake activities in pursuance of certain objectives. For example, Research and Development organisations produce information. Let us try to understand how this is done.
12.4.1 Research and Development
Research Organisations in science and technology, social sciences and humanities have been established specially to conduct research in their respective fields. Research is a creative activity that contributes to the growth of knowledge for the benefit of society. It is a highly organised activity

Future of ICT4D worldwide that continuously creates new information. In recent times, there has been a dramatic growth in research organisations and research workers in all branches of knowledge. Governments are allocating more and more funds to conduct research. The progress of a nation is often judged by the percentage of national income spent on research and development(R&D). Research output constitutes a major part of the information handled by libraries and information centres. There has been a large-scale growth of information after the Industrial Revolution. This phenomenon is characterised by the term "information explosion". Academic institutions also conduct research as one of their major tasks besides imparting education.
12.4.2 Survey and Census
There are also organisations which are set up specifically to gather statistical information. They carry out this activity using surveys and censuses. One of the most important organisations in this respect is the Office of Registrar General, which is responsible for conducting decennial censuses to collect population data that constitute the basic information about the demographic nature of the country. Surveys and censuses are regarded as auxiliary research activities and are one of the sources of information generation.
12.4.3 Government Activities
The government is one of the generators of information. Information gets generated as a by-product of the activities of different government organisations and their agencies. These organisations perform their tasks as a matter of routine. For example, the police department has been established to maintain law and order. It is their routine administrative task. The activities of these departments, in turn, generate information about many burning topics such as dowry deaths, corruption, terrorism and the like. The Planning Commission and State Planning Departments of government have generated enormous information on almost all socio-economic issues. A major part of the information (both statistical and descriptive) needed by social science researchers in academic institutions and decision-makers in governments, businesses, and industry emanates from governmental sources. Besides the administrative organs of the government, the legislative and judicial bodies also contribute to the growth of information, e.g. the basic sources of legal information are the legislatures, which enact different laws, and the judiciary, which interprets the laws when disputes arise in their implementation and enforcement. Apart from the government and its agencies, business and industrial organisations generate vital business and industrial information during their regular activities. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.

1. What is meant by Generation of Information? Give a few examples of Information /
Knowledge Society: institutions and organisations that generate information. Characteristics

12.5 INFORMATION TRANSFER
Implied in one of the definitions of the words "knowledge" and "information" is the concept that an item of knowledge becomes an item of information when it is "set to motion". When it enters the active process of being communicated or transferred from one or more persons, groups, or organisations (receive). Many people will argue that knowledge, as defined here, has no intrinsic value, but its value will be realised only when it is successfully transferred. Others argue that the value of information cannot be realised until it is actively applied in decision-making. Either of the viewpoints must necessarily concede that value is dependent upon transfer. Thus, information transfer is an important aspect explained in this section.
12.5.1 Information Transfer Chain
The process of flow of information from its source of generation (generator) to its place of use (user) is called information transfer. Before the generated information reaches the user, it passes through certain points known as links. The flow of information from the point of generation to the point of use through all-in-between points (links) forms a chain known as an information transfer chain. The flow of information might follow different paths known as channels. There are many paths through which information may reach the user. The partners in the information transfer chain and the channels through which information reaches the end users are represented in Fig. 12.2.
GENERATORS
Authors Researchers Artists
Fig. 12.2: Information Transfer Chain

Future of ICT4D Check Your Progress: 3
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you understand by the expression "Information Transfer
Chain"?

2. Why do researchers need information?

12.6 INFORMATION TYPES, REQUIREMENTS
AND USERS
Just as we have seen that the word information has no single universally accepted definition, there is no single way we can classify information. The types of information could be grouped using different criteria depending upon the purpose of such a classification. However, in the broadest sense, information falls into four categories: i) education, ii) entertainment, iii) transaction, and iv) problem-solving or decision-making. Of these four categories, the fourth one is to be considered to be very important.
12.6.1 Information for Education
Students increasingly utilise this category of information in their academic pursuits. Teachers also need this type of information to impart education to their students. Researchers use information based on their research activities. A researcher needs information for three purposes: i) to keep up with the developments in his/her area of specialisation, ii) to know the state of the art of his/her specialised subject, and iii) to gather specific data and information needed at different stages of his/her research work.
12.6.2 Information for Entertainment
Every individual desire to obtain information relating to entertainment, depending upon the types of entertainment he/she is interested in, such as music, sports, films, etc. Therefore, this type of information forms a part of human existence, and the need for it cannot be underestimated.

12.6.3 Transaction type of Information Information /
Knowledge Society: Characteristics Industrial firms and business houses mostly use transactional information. Financial institutions and business houses generate large quantities of transaction information for internal and external use. Marketplace actors use information to make decisions and control processes, while sellers in exchange transactions use information to determine the best price to charge for an item.
12.6.4 Problem Solving or Decision Support Information
According to the definition provided by the Information Industry Association of USA, "Information is the resulting work product when data elements are organised and communicated in a useful form to reduce uncertainty. (e.g., to help to answer a question, to solve a problem, or to form the basis for action)." We must view information within the decision-making process and distinguish among levels and types of information users and how they utilise information. This aspect is discussed in the next section.
12.6.5 Information Users and Their Requirements
User studies like NSF and others have shown substantial differences in information-seeking behaviour and use among professional groups. Distinctions have been identified due to differences in training, personality characteristics, professional requirements, work structure, etc. Each professional group exhibits specific characteristics vis-a-vis its information- seeking behaviour and use. Some of the professional groups are: i) Scientists, ii) Engineers, and iii) Executives. i) Scientists Scientists, as information users, can be characterised as follows: * they produce documents, and they contribute to the information flow as well as draw on it; * their work progresses over long periods; * they are interested in theory and source data; * they browse literature for idea exploration and formulation; * they seek comprehensive information and find bibliographies helpful. ii) Engineers Engineers as information seekers possess the following characteristics: * have a focused direction of enquiry; * their primary object is to produce products; * They seek reliable answers, not guides to sources of information, and so do not require bibliographies on subjects of interest. They merely require information which will help them in solving their problems; * they require objective information and

Future of ICT4D * work within time constraints. iii) Executives Executives, especially those people who are policymakers, have different information requirements. Some of the requirements of this group are: * they rely heavily on evaluated, aggregated data; * they make a variety of short, medium, and long-term decisions; * more often, with a good deal of information (70% of information is considered enough), they can solve their decision problems; * they seek options (alternatives) rather than answers in utilising information; * subjective (human) judgement plays an important role in executive decision-making processes. There are undoubtedly additions to these listings as well as exceptions. However, they serve to separate and distinguish and create awareness that not only does each group of professionals require information, but the characteristics and attributes of information are specific to the profession.
12.6.6 Information and its Impact on Society
Information and knowledge are deemed to be social wealth. The benefits of this social wealth should be available to all members of society. This social wealth is available in various physical forms (e.g., books, periodicals, microforms, etc). An ordinary citizen requires a variety of information. The use of information certainly affects one's mental growth and changes one's outlook and lifestyle. The impact of information and knowledge may also be noticed in several human activities. Some of these are education, Research and Development, Government activities, mass communication, etc. Society has undergone significant changes at various periods of human history, and information use has been cited as one of the most important agents of this change. Three stages are generally identified during societal evolution. These are the agrarian society, the industrial society, and the post-industrial society. In all these societal transformations, information played a vital role. The emergence of post-industrial society in the 20th century is based on technological developments and the revolution in the organisation and processing of information and its subsequent use.
12.7 INFORMATION SOCIETY
Society is a dynamic and open system. Open systems exist in a state of flux, continually reacting and adjusting to changing conditions and development from within and outside the system. Generally, the changes are evolutionary. However, revolutionary factors or influences may sometimes arise, forcing a more abrupt and drastic modification in the social system and resulting in whole-scale transformations in social institutions and relationships.

Scholars, philosophers, and scientists have been predicting such a Information / Knowledge Society: revolutionary transformation of modern society since the Industrial Characteristics Revolution was accepted as an example of revolutionary social transformation (Machlup, 1962). There have been many predictions and discussions about the implication of such a transition in several writings across different disciplines. Nevertheless, there has been little consensus on the causes and results of the predicted social revolution. There are almost as many labels for the resulting society as there have been treatments. Though different causes have been identified as transformations, most authors agree that the driving forces behind the social transformation result from the rapid development and diffusion of Information Technologies. The basic aspect that has been emphasised is that information is rapidly becoming an important resource behind the industrial development of the nations. The most appropriate means to depict the process in the community is by the expression "Information Society". However, there is considerable debate on the precise nature of this new "Information Society" concept. The idea is that the advanced societies are experiencing a transformation to Information Society, economically based on the exploitation of microelectronic, computing and telecommunication technologies. In the following subsections, let us discuss the Information Society concept, its origin, the main factors that determine its arrival, and whether the concept has some basic economic connotation as an Information Economy.
12.7.1 Definitions and Meaning of Information Society
Branscomb (1986) states, "It is a society where the majority of people are engaged in creating, gathering, storing, processing or distributing information". Manfred Kochen (1987) writes that the simple notion of society in which information rather than material flows constitute most of its "communication and control" exchanges is extended to stress that: a) most members generate knowledge by knowledge-based- based procedures that are knowledge-intensive; b) information consistently reflects basic social invariants; c) Rather than strength and practicality, reason and human values manage conflicts between pressures to conserve invariants and to adopt change. Having stated all this, Manfred Kochen adds that "an information society is a stage in the evolution of "community brains", towards a "world brain"! This is probably most likely to be the essence of the "great transition" that futurists seem to agree on. When enough people begin to believe it is likely to happen if it is a stage in natural, cultural evolution, then this belief may contribute to its self-fulfilment - it will take some decades before this idea is sufficiently widespread and until the first information society appears". Ronfeldt (1992) thinks that "Information Society" sees the steady blurring of the boundaries, which presently separate computer hardware, communication systems and satellites, global networks and more". While none of the above-quoted definitions is wrong, they emphasise the fluidity of the present situation,

Future of ICT4D which suggests that what is likely to emerge- and certainly in the short term- is a series of parallel information societies between which users switch according to their needs. The convergences of these separate structures may or may not come according to the type of information society which finally emerges. Another expert, Martin (1978), maintains that " the term (information society) has come to represent societies at an advanced post-industrial stage, characterised by a high degree of computerisation, large volume of electronic data transmission and an economic profile heavily influenced by the market and employment possibilities of Information Technology". The Information Society concept closely affinities with Daniel Bell's post- industrial society theory. In the "coming of post-industrial society" (1972), Bell argued that the increased part played by science in the productive process, the rise to prominence of professional, scientific, and technical groups and the introduction of computer technology are all evidence of a new "axial principle" at the core of the socio-economic system, namely, the centrality of theoretical knowledge. The emerging social framework of the Information Society builds upon this base. Information increasingly becomes a source of added value and, thus, wealth. A growing portion of workers is employed in the "Information Sphere".
12.7.2 Factors Determining the Arrival of Information
Society When we use Information Society, we usually mean society as a whole. The problem is distinguishing an information society and whether it has arrived. We must listen to the commentators and leaders to perceive the signs around us. The Information Society is a direct consequence of: * the data explosion, * the growing information consciousness and information dependence of society at large, * accelerating developments in computing and communication technologies. However, Cawkell opines that the prerequisite for an Information Society is a telecommunication-based information service infrastructure, which gradually builds up until, at some point, a critical mass of terminal users will be connected to a more or less universal network. According to Bell, the term refers mainly to the social structure of post-industrial society. It describes a society's characteristics and structure in which the driving force will be the production of information values and not material values. In considering when it will be realised, it is necessary to look at the four stages of technological development which have to be achieved: * science-based computerisation, where the computer is used extensively in national-scale projects; * management-based computerisation in both government and business; * society-based computerisation in which computers will be used for the

benefit of society as a whole; Information / Knowledge Society: * Individual-based computerisation, where each individual has access to Characteristics the terminal and computer information to solve problems, will allow creativity to flourish in this high-mass knowledge creation society. In other words, the most advanced stage of the Information Society is a high- mass knowledge creation society. From the above discussion, a high degree of computerisation, large volumes of electronic data processing and employment of Information Technology with telecommunication-based information service infrastructure are the main criteria that signify whether a society or nation has become an Information Society.
12.7.3 Different Perceptions of Information Society
Even though schemes are possible, we may categorise the literature on the Information Society into broad groups, each representing a unique perspective. In this connection, it is worth noting that Webster distinguishes and presents five different perceptions of the Information Society based on technological, economic, occupational, spatial, and cultural criteria. Let us try to understand these perceptions of the Information Society.
Technological Perception
The most common perspective of the Information Society emphasises spectacular technological innovation. The important idea is that breakthroughs in information processing, storage and transmission have led to the application of Information Technologies (IT) in virtually all areas of society. Although information technology occupies a central role in all the literature on information society, this perspective emphasises the technological infrastructure and excludes other social, economic, and political attributes. Martin provided several scenarios detailing life in the Information Society, especially the spread of digital networks, which is a key element. The convergence of computing and telecommunications resulted in the linking of computers, enabling the establishment of global networks. The development of ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) has provided the infrastructure supporting the key ingredient of post-industrial society-- information. The rapid growth of the Internet appears to bring about precisely this change. In other words, the technological perspective effectively draws attention to the potential benefits of information technologies for society. However, with such weighty emphasis on technology, generally removed from a social, cultural, and political context, it cannot provide an adequate foundation for defining the attributes of an Information Society. Also, the problem of measurement and the associated difficulty of stipulating the point on the technological scale at which a society is judged to have entered an information age is surely central to any acceptable definition of a distinctively new type of society. Popular futurists ignore it. The authors of

Future of ICT4D this school of thought are content to describe, in general terms, technological innovations, presuming that this is enough to distinguish the new society. "There are some serious scholars who encounter two problems. First, how does one come to measure the rate of technological diffusion, and second, when does a society cease to be 'industrial' and enter into the "information" category?"
Economic Perception
Some of the authors who write about the Information Society point to the growth of the service sector in the industrialised nations and the decline of employment in manufacturing. For some of the authors, the dominant characteristic of an Information Society is the nature of its economy. Machlup (1962) initiated this research perspective by analysing the growth of the "Knowledge Sector" in the US economy. In Machlup's analysis, industries primarily concerned with the production and distribution of knowledge (Knowledge Industries) were examined separately rather than as a part of the overall service sector. The knowledge industries included the educational system, the media and other communication activities, libraries and other information activities, and research/institutes. The contribution of this sector to the gross national product (GNP) was found to be significant (estimated at 40% for the early 1960's) and growing considerably higher than the industrial sector. Machlup concluded that knowledge industries would soon outpace the industrial sector, leading to the rise of a "Knowledge Society". A similar conclusion was reached at about the same time in Japan, as Umaseo (1963) predicted the rise of the "spiritual industries" over material and agricultural sectors in more developed economies. These earlier studies distinguished the knowledge or information sector from other economic sectors. The best-known and often cited study on the emergence of an information economy conceived on these lines is the report from Marc Porat. (1977). Porat (1977) initiated much of this work by broadening the view of information work to apply to more than those jobs falling within the information or knowledge sector defined by Machlup. Porat defined information activities as including all resources consumed in producing, processing, and distributing information goods and services. He defined the primary information sector as including all those businesses exchanging information goods and services in the marketplace. In addition, Porat noted that many jobs in other sectors of the economy can be thought of as information work. Nearly every organisation produces processes and distributes information for its internal consumption. Thus, a secondary information sector includes these information activities. Porat estimated that overall information activities accounted for 45% of the gross national product in 1967 and that half of the labour force was employed in information-related work. This study has been used to justify references to the United States as an Information Society. Several authors have attempted to refine and apply Porat's analysis in other contexts (Komatsuzaki,1986; Schement et al.,1983). This perspective focuses on the economy as the primary attribute of the Information Society. Examining the economic structure alone provides a limited view of the social and cultural implications of information societies.

Also, several critics contend that Porat's classification of information Information / Knowledge Society: workers needs to be narrower to be meaningful and does little to suggest the Characteristics social implications of the shift to an Information Society (Bates, 1985). Bates, for example, has noted that according to Porat, factory workers assembling information transmission equipment are considered information workers, just as are university researchers. This does not appear to be logical. He felt that such a categorisation may weaken the social distinctiveness of the information sector. Other types of objections and criticisms exist in Porat's analysis. However, such objections may not entirely invalidate Porat's findings and are not intended to do that. Marc Porat has been able to distinguish two information sectors, primary and secondary, then consolidate them and separate the non-informational elements of the economy. By re-aggregating national economic statistics, Porat can conclude that the information sector accounts for 46% of the US GNP. "The United States is now an Information based economy". As such, it is an "Information Society (where) the major arenas of economic activity are information goods and service producers, and the public and private (secondary information sector) bureaucracies".
Occupational Perception
Another popular measure of the emergence of an information society is the one that focuses on occupational change. The contention is that we have achieved an information society where the predominant occupations are found in information. In the Information Society, the number of people employed in occupations such as teaching, research, and development and in activities associated with creative industries (media, design, arts) outnumbers those employed in factories. The main characteristic of these people is the high level of education. The occupational definition of information society is often combined with an economic measure. Porat calculated that by the late 1960s, a little under half of the US labour force was to be found in the information sector. Porat connects the growth in economic significance of information with changing occupational patterns. Most identifiers of an Information Society draw on occupational changes as indicators of the approach of a new age, which reflects the introduction of new technologies. In other words, the shift in the distribution of occupations is at the heart of the theory of the Information Society.
Spatial Perception
This perception of the Information Society has a distinctive stress on space. Here, the major emphasis is on the Information Networks that connect locations and, as a result, greatly affect the organisation of time and space. This aspect has been considered an index of the Information Society in recent years. The centrality of information networks linking locations within and between towns, regions, nations, continents, and the entire world is an important consideration from a spatial perspective. In many writings, the technological bases of information networks are emphasised because these networks provide the infrastructure that enables information to be processed and distributed. These developments may lead to an emerging networked

Future of ICT4D society. The salient idea here is of information circulating along electronic "highways". However, no one has quantified how much information must flow along these routes and at what rate to constitute an Information Society. Though no one can deny that information networks are an important feature of modern societies and facilitate instantaneous communications around the globe; databases can be accessed from any place to any place, so some people would ask, "Why should the presence of networks lead analysts to categorise societies as information economies?". It may be stated that the question of what constitutes a network is serious and raises the problem of distinguishing different levels of networking and how we stipulate a point at which we have entered a Network/Information Society.
Cultural Perception
Developments such as the invention of radio, television, and computers, coupled with the recent advances in telecommunication networks and media technologies, are having a great impact on the lifestyles of people. It is stated that we live in a media-laden society, and the informational features of our world are more thoroughly penetrative now than in earlier times. The informational environment is much more intimate and more constitutive of us. For example, the informational dimensions of the clothes we wear, the styling of our hair and faces, and how we work make one aware that social intercourse nowadays involves more informational content than before.
According to Webster,
"contemporary culture is manifested by more heavily information laden than any of its predecessors. We exist in a media-saturated environment that means life is quintessentially about symbolisation, about exchanging and receiving messages about ourselves and others. It is acknowledgement of this explosion of significance many writers conceive of having entered an information society". But no writer attempted to measure this development in quantitative terms and only describe our living in a sea of signs one fuller than at any other epoch. In other words, "we are surrounded by more and more information and less and less meaning". Reviewing the different definitions of the Information Society, it emerges that they are underdeveloped or imprecise. Whether technological, economic, occupational, spatial, or cultural perspectives, we are confronted with highly problematic notions of what constitutes, and how to distinguish, an Information Society. We must be aware of these difficulties. Though, as a heuristic device, the term Information Society might have some value in helping us to explore and analyse the features of the contemporary world, it cannot be accepted by all as a definitive. In other words, though one may acknowledge that information plays a vital role in contemporary society, one has to remain cautious regarding the information society's scenarios and assert that information has become the chief distinguishing feature of modern times.

Check Your Progress: 4 Information / Knowledge Society: Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers. Characteristics
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Briefly explain the essence of the "Information Society" concept as
reflected in the conceptual analysis of literature.

2. State the attributes of an Information Society.

3. What are the economic implications of an Information Society?

12.8 KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY
Change is the essence of a growing society, and Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are seen as the facilitators of change. It is a decisively qualitative change in information which marks a break with the past. Information is viewed as a disturber of traditional relationships, alignments, and the future basis of financial, political, and societal power. A new class structure is being created around the wealth of information. Understanding and anticipating the consequences of such a new class structure of society is important both for the First and Third World countries. From this point of view, the Information Society is regarded as one in which theoretical knowledge takes a preeminent position. Theoretical knowledge is an arresting idea that does, prima facie, define a new type of society that hinges on generating and using information/knowledge. If theory is at the point of initiating developments, in contrast to one-time practical demands, then such knowledge could be said to herald a new type of society. However, the major difficulty with this notion is defining with precision what theoretical knowledge means. Theory evokes abstract and generalisable rules, laws, and procedures. Advances in knowledge have resulted in their codification in the form of texts learned and used by the would-be practitioners, and their experiences would be integrated into the body of knowledge. If we state that we now inhabit a knowledge society, knowledge has become constitutive of how we live.

Future of ICT4D 12.8.1 Definition of Knowledge Society
"The transformation of existing societal structures - by knowledge as a core resource for economic growth, employment and as a factor of production, constitutes the criteria for designating advanced modern society as a "Knowledge Society". In a "Knowledge Society", the traditional measures of competitiveness, such as labour costs, resource endowments and infrastructure, are replaced by new dimensions (indicators) such as patents, research, and development (R&D), and availability of (or capability to afford) knowledge workers. In other words, knowledge exists in the people's minds. It becomes a productivity factor when such knowledge is combined with capital, labour, existing (recorded) knowledge and other inputs to produce goods and services. The people of developed countries are very much conscious of the pivotal role of information/knowledge and exploit this resource for developmental activities. The human brain is a valued resource in such countries. The new trend is the transformation of global economies into knowledge-based economies. It may be mentioned here that transforming global economies to knowledge economies does not guarantee economic growth with "equity" either within or between nations, and a gap will exist between knowledge- rich and knowledge-poor countries. This is because knowledge, despite its public good characteristics, becomes a much-valued resource to be possessed and harnessed for economic benefits. Further, the value accrued to individual users through the availability of information differs for different people as they are not conscious of absorbing the available information. Suppose we desire to create an equitable knowledge society. In that case, we must strive towards a perfect society where all forms of knowledge are recognised and valued, especially from where they originate, and benefit that society. In other words, it is a dynamic process in which not only the people who access the information and knowledge will be the beneficiaries but also the probable users.
12.8.2 Features of Perfect Knowledge Society
In a perfect knowledge society, all people have: * open and timely access to information and knowledge * the capacity to absorb and interpret information * Avenues and opportunities to use knowledge for informed decision- making and transformation to a higher quality of life.
12.8.3 Developing Countries
As part of economic history, the knowledge era has unfolded remarkably. Consequently, most basic tools for creating and managing wealth have lagged far behind the need. This is true of most of the developing countries. Knowledge has become the cornerstone of wealth creation in a knowledge society. Intellectual capital comprises three primary types of capital: human, structural, and customer. Of these, human capital is the most important.

Developing countries need to recognise and value their human resources Information / Knowledge Society: capital and capitalise on it to amass a wealth of knowledge that works for the Characteristics poor and promotes social equality. The wealth of knowledge will enable developing countries to emerge as strong economies independent of low-cost labour, increasing productivity and income. Therefore, it is necessary to open avenues for knowledge incubation to be supplemented by capacity-building support and enabling policy frameworks. These policy frameworks are intended to provide opportunities for people to use the power of knowledge to advance their growth. Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss the important characteristics of "Knowledge Society".

2. What steps should the developing nations take to progress towards a
knowledge society?

12.9 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, an attempt has been made to explain the basic facets of information and its related concepts. The difficulties associated with defining the term precisely have been discussed. Concepts like the Information Generation Process and Information Transfer Chain have been briefly described and explained. The significance of information and its impact on society have been discussed to help you understand the importance of information and its use in modern society. The concept of Information Society and its different ramifications, including the main factors responsible for its formation, have been analysed and briefly explained to you. The technological, economic, occupational, spatial, and cultural aspects influencing the formation of the Information Society have been described. The meaning of what constitutes a Knowledge Society and the centrality of theoretical knowledge in such a society has been briefly introduced to you. The concept of a Knowledge-based economy and how developing countries must strive to recognise and value 'human resources capital' to transform into knowledge economies has also been briefly discussed.

Future of ICT4D By studying the contents of this Unit, you will be able to understand the vital role of information/knowledge wealth in modern society in enhancing the nation's economy.
12.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bates, B. J. (1985). Evolving to an Information Society: Issues and
Problems. Paper Presented at the International Communication
Association Conference, San Francisco, CA.
2. Bell, D. (1973). The Coming of Post-industrial Society: A Venture in
Social Forecasting. New York: Basic Books.
3. Bell, D. (1979). The Social Framework of Information Society. In:
Dertouzos,
4. M. L. and Moses, J. (eds). Computer Age: A Twenty-Year View.
Cambridge, MSS: MIT Press, 163-211.5. Branscomb, A. (1986). Law and Culture in the Information Society.
Information Society. 4(4), 279-311.6. Branscomb, A. (1994). Who Owns Information? From Privacy to Public
Access. Basic Books: New York.
7. Cawkell, A.E. (1987). Evolution of an Information Society. London:
ASLIB.
8. Katz, R.L. (1988). Information Society: An International Perspective.
New York: Praeger.
9. Kochen, M. (1987). A New Concept of Information Society. London:
ASLIB, 141-54.10. Komatsuzaki, S. (1986). An Economic Impact of Informationisation.
Keo Communication Review. 7, March. 13-24.11. Lyon, D. (1988). Information Society: Issues and Illusions. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
12. Machlup, F. (1962). The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in
the USA. New Jersey: Princeton University.
13. Martin, W. J. The Global Information Society. 2nd rev. Ed. London:
ASLIB Gower, 1-16.14. Porat, MU (1977). The Information Economy: Definition and
Measurement. Washington: US Department of Commerce.
15. Schement, J.R., (et. al). (1983). The Information Society in California:
Social Factors Influencing its Emergence. Telecommunications Policy. 7(1), 64-72.16. Stevens, N. (1986). The History of Information. Advances in
Librarianship. 14, 1-48.17. Sweeney, G.P. (ed.) (1982). Information and the Transformation of
Society. North Holland: Amsterdam.
18. Toffler, A. (1996). Powershift: Knowledge, Wealth, and Violence at the
Edge of 21st Century. New York: Bantam.

19. Umaseo, T. (1963). On Information Industries. Hoseo Asahi. January. 4- Information /
Knowledge Society:
17. Webster, F. (1996). The Information Society: Conceptions and
Characteristics Critique. In :
20. Encyclopaedia of Library and Information Science.New York: Dekker,
21. vol.58(21). 74-112.22. Webster, F. (1999). Knowledgeability and Democracy in an Information
Age.
23. Library Review. 48(8), 373-83.24. Webster, F. (2002). Theories of the Information Society. 2nd ed. London:
Routledge.
12.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Information is a popular and most used word in the English language.
Many writers have attempted to define the concept, so the term has many definitions in the literature. However, there is not one agreed-upon definition that is acceptable to all. Each definition gives the concept its contextual meaning depending upon the author's subject specialisation and the use to which it is put. Information is made up of symbolic and descriptive elements that communicate knowledge. It refers to the substance or contents of documents and their physical existence; the term is also used to designate both the message (substance and form) and its communication. A distinction is generally made between raw information (namely facts, concepts, and representation) and the documents in which it is recorded. Though the two terms data and information are commonly used interchangeably, one for the other, there is a difference between the two. For example, data are discrete and unorganised pieces of information. Data becomes information when these pieces are processed, interpreted, and presented in an organised or logical form for better understanding and analysis, leading to valid inferences. Knowledge is an organised body of information that can be used as the basis of further knowledge. Information which removes uncertainty and brings about change in concepts is considered to be knowledge. The other related terms for information are facts, intelligence, and wisdom. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Generation of Information: Information results from different human
activities and events. Activities are undertaken by individuals and organisations with definite objectives. On the other hand, events are things that occur, happen, or take place. All intellectual activities pursued and systematically completed give rise to useful information. R&D activity is such an activity. Research and

Future of ICT4D development organisations in science, technology, social sciences, and humanities have been established to conduct research. Research in any subject is a creative activity and contributes to the growth of existing knowledge to benefit society. Research is a highly organised activity worldwide that continuously creates large quantities of information. Academic institutions such as universities and colleges also undertake research as part of their educational programmes and contribute to the growth of information and knowledge. Government activities and organisations that collect statistical information are also involved in generating and producing information. The entire activity relating to the production of information is known as the generation of information. In other words, the generation of information means the creation of information. This is accomplished both by individuals and organisations. The table given below indicates some of the organisations which generate information.
Sl. No. Organisations Institutions
i) The Meteorology department ii) Reserve Bank India
iii) Research Organisation Like the National
Chemical Laboratory
Check Your Progress: 3
1. In the definition of the words "Information" and "knowledge" is hidden
or implicit, the concept that an item of knowledge becomes an item of information when it is "set in motion" when information enters the active process of being communicated or transferred from one or more persons, groups, or organisations (sender) to one or more other persons, groups, or organisations (receiver). Many argue that knowledge or information has no intrinsic value. Its value will be realised when it is successfully transferred or communicated. Information transfer refers to sending information from a source (sender) to the receiver. In other words, it goes from the generator to the user. This can be done with the help of different channels or paths. The different points through which information passes before it reaches the end user are known as links. When interconnected, they form a chain known as the information transfer chain or information transfer model. Figure 2.2 on page no. 35 depicts the process of information transfer from the generator to the user through different links which form a chain. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Everybody needs information for some purpose or the other. Researchers
(or scientists) need information for three purposes; i) to keep up with new developments taking place in their areas of interest and specialisation; ii) to get acquainted with the state- of- the art of the subject;

iii) to collect specific data and information needed at different stages of Information / Knowledge Society: their work. Characteristics Keeping up with current developments is one of the key factors for success in the career of a research worker. This activity not only updates his/her knowledge but also stimulates his/her thought process and often suggests new ideas and methods of experiments. Before a researcher decides on a new project, he/she needs to undertake a thorough literature search, i.e., he/she must examine the various documents containing information on the topic. He/she does this to get acquainted with the state of the area's knowledge and identify gaps and shortcomings, thus assessing further scope of work in that area. Information will also help him/her to avoid duplication in research. Thus, a research worker always requires information, though the nature of the information required may change occasionally.
2. Several scholars, scientists, and philosophers have predicted a
revolutionary transformation of modern industrial society. Many causes have been identified and attributed as the driving force behind such a transformation. However, most people opine that "information" is the defining feature of the modern world. We are told that we have entered an information age and are rapidly moving towards a "global information economy". Many writers identify an entirely new phenomenon called Information Societies - the examples of which are found in the United States, Britain, Japan, and Germany. The "Information Society" concept envisions the transition of an Industrialised Society into one in which information--in its broadest and most diverse forms--is the key driving force. Two major factors underlying the Information Society's claims. First, society is becoming increasingly centred on information handling, processing, storage, and dissemination using microelectronics-based technologies made available through the convergence of computers with telecommunications, namely ICT. Second, this shift is reflected in an emerging occupational structure in which the "information workers'' category has become predominant. In other words, the Information Society appears to be an outcome of technological and economic changes. Attributes of an Information Society are: i) Shift from an industrial economy to an information economy. That is to say that in an industrial economy, capital is the strategic resource, while in an Information Economy, information becomes the strategic resource; ii) a telecommunication-based information service infrastructure; iii) a high degree of computerisation, large volumes of electronic data transmission and employment of IT; iv) characterised by the fact that the rapid and convenient delivery of needed information is the ordinary state of affairs. 213

Future of ICT4D 3. Economic Implications of Information Society: Different dimensions might characterise Information Society. One of these relates to the economic structure. We come across several references in literature to the economic implications of the Information Society. The state of information in the economy generally has pervasive effects on its functioning. It greatly impacts sectors that provide information products and services, such as the press, television, radio, film libraries, and other information providers. Machlup initiated studies analysing the growth of the "knowledge Sector" in the US economy. The knowledge industry includes the educational system, media, communication, libraries, information, and research institutions. Machlup found that this sector's contribution to the Gross National Product (GNP) was 40% in the early 1960s and is growing at a rate higher than that of the industrial sector. Marc Porat, who continued the research in this direction, enlarged the scope of information work to include all the jobs falling within the information or knowledge sector as defined by Machlup. According to Porat, information activities include all resources consumed in producing, processing, and distributing information goods and services. Porat estimated that these activities amounted to 45 % of the GNP in 1967. In conclusion, the contribution of the information sector to successful economic function is beyond doubt. However, this is not the same as saying that information has become a primary output of all developed economies. We may say that we are moving towards information Economies. However, we are not wholly dependent on producing, selling, and exporting information goods and services to preserve our economic well-being. Check Your Progress: 5
1. Characteristics of Knowledge Society
One of the most popular themes discussed in general literature for more than a decade has been that technologically advanced economies are moving beyond industrial capitalism to information that will bring profound changes in the form and structure of the economic system. Economists long ago recognised that the most important resource determining the economic efficiency of any economy, industry, productive process, or household is information and its effective communication. Information's characteristics define the state of knowledge that underlies all economic processes and decision-making structures. The transformation of societal structures - by knowledge as a core resource for economic growth and employment and as a factor of 214 production- constitutes the main criteria for designating a modern society

as a "Knowledge Society". In a knowledge society, the traditional Information / Knowledge Society: measures of competitiveness, such as labour costs, resource endowments, Characteristics and infrastructure, get superseded by new dimensions such as patents, research and development, and availability of knowledge workers. In a perfect knowledge society, all people have: * open and timely access to information and knowledge; * the capacity to absorb and interpret information; * avenues and opportunities to use knowledge for informed decision- making and transformation to higher quality lives.
2. Knowledge exists in people's minds, and when combined with capital,
labour, existing knowledge, and other inputs, it produces goods and services and thus becomes a factor of productivity. Many developed nations have realised this fact and have transformed into knowledge- based economies where conventional raw materials and physical labour (Brute-force economy) are being replaced by a brain-force economy. Developing nations need to recognise and value their human resources capital and capitalise on it to amass a wealth of knowledge that works for the poor and promotes social equality. The wealth of knowledge, in turn, will create opportunities for developing countries to emerge from dependence on low-cost labour as a source of comparative advantage, increasing productivity and incomes. Avenues need to be created for knowledge incubation (growth) to be supplemented by capacity-building support and enabling policy frameworks that provide opportunities for people to use the power of knowledge to improve their growth.

F uture of ICT4D UNIT 13 KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY:
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
PERSPECTIVE
Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 Information Society and Knowledge Society
13.2.1 Information Economy and Wealth of Nations
13.2.2 Digitally Empowered society and knowledge economy
13.3 Characteristics of Change: Some Indicators
13.3.1 Production to Demand-based Economy
13.3.2 Mass Society and De-massification
13.3.3 Technology, Innovation and Workforce Changes
13.4 Information Access: International and National Aspects
13.4.1 International Flow of Information
13.4.2 ICT and Development
13.5 Digital Divide
13.5.1 Data security
13.6 Economics and Policy Issues
13.7 Let Us Sum Up
13.8 Keywords
13.9 Further Readings
13.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
13.0 INTRODUCTION
Human beings have changed the course of nature in the name of development for many centuries. Our earth has been exploited and contaminated by the end products of industrialisation and globalisation. These two concepts were proudly celebrated and highlighted by every human for being able to live an enhanced and developed life. All these developments became possible when humans used their knowledge, which played a crucial role in evolving us and enabling the development of our lifestyle. Knowledge differentiated us from our cousins - the apes- and aided in creativity, logic, and critical thinking when deciding right and wrong. There is a big debate on defining knowledge by various philosophers over thousands of years, but the essentials of knowledge reveal its nature. Knowledge is something we know already or the complex ideas we try to learn. Plato defined knowledge as attainable, which is the truth; Socrates says it is the awareness of one's ignorance, which possibly be the truth, and Aristotle believed knowledge must be objectively true and necessary. Knowledge serves as a foundation for effective communication between human beings. The ability to communicate verbally 216 was one of the major reasons for the evolution and development of humans.

Human communication uses a combination of verbal and non-verbal cues, Knowledge Society:
Developing Countries
alphabets, codes, and various symbols. For the past two centuries, electronic Perspective communication helped us to communicate faster, and it evolved to the recent technology of the Internet and social media.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to; * Understand the relationship between the Information Society and the
Knowledge Society
* Know the types of economy and access to knowledge.
* Understand Agrarian, Industrial, Information/Knowledge, and Internet
economies. * Understand international and national aspects of knowledge access. * Assess information needs for national development, especially in developing countries. * Assess the cost of information support in developing countries. * Understand international cooperation in information. * Analyse technology transfer communication cost and its impact on developing economies. * Understand information support for development planning, including rural planning. * Understand the digital divide and its attempts to bridge it.
13.2 INFORMATION SOCIETY AND
KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY
13.2.1 Information Economy and Wealth of Nations
'Information is power' is an adage. There are several historical examples when an information-rich society, advanced in technology and industrial development, with the capacity to produce an abundance of material wealth, had become predatory and arrogated to itself the control of and dominance over other societies, eventually turned self-destructive. Therefore, in recent years, the issue of 'Which is it knowledge or information?' has arisen from the point of contribution to real sustained societal benefits. Hence, the associated terms Knowledge Society and Information Society are also used. The scope of the terms 'Information Economy' and 'Economics of Information' indicate that they are related and not mutually exclusive. However, in their scope, they can be differentiated. The former concept relates to the macro-level (cf. agrarian economy and industrial economy) to a country as a whole; the latter, on the other hand, is more applicable to the micro-level, dealing with, for example, the efficiency or input/output ratio of a specific information service, such as selective dissemination of information, online access, etc. The relationship between the wealth of nations and the information economy impacts various factors such as globalisation, Human

Future of ICT4D capital development and overall infrastructure that fosters growth and wealth. British economist Adam Smith wrote that a nation may lose its physical material wealth. Still, if it could save and retain the knowledge by which such material wealth was produced, it would be possible to create it again. Still, if the knowledge produced by material wealth were lost or destroyed, everything would be lost. The growth of a knowledge-based society will bring about fundamental changes in the production, distribution, and exchange of information, and almost every social and cultural institution will change in some way. The 20th century is called the Information Age, which experienced a rapid shift from traditional methods of communication to electronic and Digital methods. The invention of the Internet is seen as one of the greatest of all, as it allows us to communicate faster and more efficiently. Internet technology has contributed to the knowledge society through enhanced applications such as Web 2.0, enabling unbound possibilities of creating and sharing, unrestricted time, and physical constraints in accessing information.
13.2.2 Digitally Empowered Society and Knowledge Economy
In today's techno-centric world, Digital literacy and competency are essential to accessing information and the knowledge economy. However, digital tools are not yet fully accessible to millions of people. Digital literacy consumes digital communication tools, applications, and networks to access information in a knowledge society. The Internet has transformed from a medium of information dissemination to a platform of content creation, reproduction and sharing, enabling users to create, reproduce and gain information. Globalisation and other technological developments have paved the way for digital information flow, but knowledge may have yet to reach many people. Without Knowledge dispersal to the right receivers, the digital divide is the greatest challenge in underdeveloped and developing countries. Many researchers have argued across disciplines that knowledge plays a major role in sustainable development. UNESCO aimed to foster knowledge societies by providing access to information with the help of technologies for economic development and intercultural dialogue. Countries like Estonia, Singapore, and South Korea have implemented a comprehensive e-governance system enabling citizens to include digital signatures in documents, and smart cities have high-speed internet facilities. In 2015, the Indian government initiated the Digital India programme to transform our nation into a digitally empowered society and knowledge economy. The program focused on digital infrastructure, digital literacy, and digitalised payments to utilise the power of digital technologies for the nation's development. However, there are challenges in this programme, such as the digital divide, data theft and privacy issues. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.

1) Discuss the role of knowledge in human evolution. Knowledge Society:
Developing Countries
Perspective

2) Explain the role of Digital empowerment in development.

13.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF CHANGE: SOME
INDICATORS
13.3.1 Production to Demand-based Economy
For centuries, human beings have depended on nature to provide for most of their needs, so the production level determines the level of consumption. Applying knowledge, especially scientific, technical, and managerial, to development has changed that scenario. One characteristic of the change is the increasing proportion of returns to a given effort and investment (a value-added return) and a subtle shift in the axis of economics from a supply base to a demand base. A demand-based economy now experiences a shift from a production-based economy to a demand-driven approach that focuses on consumers 'preferences and needs. Understanding consumer behaviours is essential for strategic decision- making in the business environment. The dependent nature of humans has changed over time, with knowledge application shifting from supply-based to demand-based, which has enabled the mass production of demands from society. Knowledge-based economy indicators reduce environmental deterioration by transforming demand culture with the help of technology. Technology helps people's lives by improving the quality and ease of access to various applications and modernisations and educating society. Education thus enhances productivity and creativity, facilitating knowledge efficiency.
13.3.2 Mass Society and De-massification
Mass Society and De-massification concepts are widely used in cultural studies and sociology to illustrate cultural patterns and social structures. Urbanisation and industrialisation crafted a social condition of homogeneity among people. Problems of modern societies arise from their growing complexity, that is, multiple interactions and interdependence, thanks in large measure to developments in ICTs and transportation. The resolution of the problem calls for formulating appropriate policies, creating political and administrative structures responsive to the new scales of social demands, and developing more comprehensive, secular, and integrated goals that diverse people can share. The characteristics of Mass society include mass

Future of ICT4D production, consumption, centralisation of power, making the public consume similar products on a mass scale, and generalisation in opinions created by Mass media. The main characteristic of a second-wave industrial economy is the mass production of large quantities of goods using machines that repeat rapidly predefined actions. The third-wave information economy is characterised by information-intensive, robotised manufacturing systems capable of endless, cheap variations and customised end-products to meet customers' special needs and micro-markets. This enables small, specialised units to compete with larger general production units or obtain contracts from the latter to produce value-added products and services. Smaller units, like those in developing countries, can create niche markets. All these are changing the nature of market competition and mail-ordering systems. It is revolutionising and de-massifying production and distribution systems. De-Massification involves customising and personalising products and services based on individual/customer needs and preferences. The concept extended its arms when the Internet and digital technologies were invented. Decentralised applications and network platforms like social media enable customers to access information and content based on their needs and preferences.
13.3.3 Technology, Innovation and Workforce Changes
In an information economy, the main trade items are information and data, the products of the information industry, hardware and software, and related knowledge and expertise. More enterprises can access data and information about their competitors and customers. Customers can access and receive information about competing firms and their products and services. Loyalty, trust, and open communications will reshape the nature of customer and supplier contracts; suppliers will draw directly on information held in databases by their customers, working closely and seamlessly as an in-house supplier now does. Electronic mail and billing systems will reduce the cost of transactions. With a global reach for communicating electronically, distance will not be a determinant of markets and costs. Enterprises organise certain types of work in shifts according to the time zones - Australia and East Asia, Europe, and America, such that work on a project or a product can go on almost round the clock in different countries. Add to this the profit from wage differential, for example, in developing countries with abundant skill and expertise. Thanks to the networks, clients can receive customised products and value-added services when and where they want. Gartner Glossary highlighted the impact of digital technologies in the Industrial Revolution and mentioned it as the fourth Industrial Revolution leading to the rise of small industrial businesses. Gartner Glossary defined digitalisation as using digital technologies to transform business models and generate revenue. With affordable digital devices and reduced Internet costs, India is experiencing a digital revolution. According to the MSME (Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises) report for 2021-2022, our country has 30 million small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The SME sector is 220 growing at 8% per year, and by 2026, 12 million people will be involved in

small-scale enterprises. The Digital India programme facilitated a growth in Knowledge Society:
Developing Countries
digital payments through UPI (Unified Payment Interface). Perspective The workforce challenges are poor infrastructure and insufficient training in accessing digital technologies. 2016 The IFC (International Finance Corporation) reported a massive finance demand gap in SME sectors. It also recommends reforming our educational system to provide skill development and upskilling programmes to meet current industry needs. One of the most important challenges is data security. Due to poor infrastructure and inadequate financial support, digital technologies are prone to cyber-attacks. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss the status of Digital India towards development.

13.4 INFORMATION ACCESS: INTERNATIONAL
AND NATIONAL ASPECTS
13.4.1 International Flow of Information
Knowledge is embodied in people, in things natural and man-made, and documents and other media. Scientific, technical, and managerial knowledge is a key input to socio-economic development. Therefore, knowledgeable persons, intellectuals, and scholars are a nation's most valuable resources and assets. Investments for developing this resource, the best basis for sustainable long-term national development, should receive top priority in any national development plan. Developing countries majorly rely on technical knowledge for their economic development, but the information systems in their information systems lack the technological advancements to access and analyse information. These developing countries benefit from the information accessed from developed countries, better understanding their countries' resources. Information flows across cultures, nations ignoring traditional borders and leading to a change through the major forms of * Digital technologies * Media and other entertainment tools * News channels * Participatory journalism applications
13.4.2 ICT and Development
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) uses computing and telecommunication technologies to facilitate information creation, collection,

Future of ICT4D transmission, and storage. These technologies include computing, wired, and wireless technologies to support various communication technologies. ICT has enhanced the pace of learning and knowledge creation, boosted productivity, and accelerated the economy. The role of ICT in development is fundamental as it transforms society and leads to growth. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) emphasises that ICT for development is not just digitalisation or technological improvement but is about educating the communities for inclusive growth, innovation, and improved well-being. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How do ICT tools transform society?

13.5 DIGITAL DIVIDE
In the 20th century, the term Digital Divide was coined to define the divide between individuals who own a telephone and who do not. After the invention of the Internet, the same term was used to describe individuals with and without digital and Internet access. The digital divide in underdeveloped and developing countries is characterised by unequal access to the Internet and bandwidth inequality. In 2023, more than 692 million internet users were in India, of which 67 per cent are from urban and 31 per cent from the rural population. According to the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) report, Indian women are 33 % less likely to access the Internet than men. The harsh reality of the enormous digital divide hit us hard during the pandemic; a significant issue in various sectors, such as education, healthcare, and the economy, was evident despite continuous efforts under the Digital India programme. Disparities in accessing online education, limited resources for e-learning, and a lack of digitised library resources have made the pandemic a difficult situation for students. This divide is often caused by poverty, lack of infrastructure, and cultural expectations. Women and girls in our country and worldwide can harness ICT's potential to improve their lives and communities and participate in policy decisions.
13.5.1 Data Security
The process involves protecting digitised information in any digital device, including hardware, software, and storage devices, against cyber-attacks, insider threats, data thefts, etc. Data security is essential in international and national organisations to protect data from theft, breaches, and financial and reputational loss. Governments of a few countries have implemented

censorship and information filters. Changes in work culture, such as Knowledge Society:
Developing Countries
telecommuting, working for multiple organisations simultaneously, and Perspective forming virtual teams and online meetings, had become inevitable post- pandemic. These changes offer advantages to the family and individual but also disadvantages depending on socio-economic and technological development, the nature of work, and existing work culture and habits. IT developments are happening at a pace that leaves little time for national authorities, managers, and decision-makers to understand and evaluate their impact on the country's social, political, economic, and cultural fabric. Privacy and confidentiality of information; freedom of access to and publication of information; sovereignty and conflicts vis a vis nation-states; intellectual property and business law-related matters; trade-in information services across national borders; and activities of transnational corporations in technology transfer and information services. To determine the extent of economic and political vulnerability caused by a country's heavy reliance on external information, information services, and technologies and to reduce such dependence if necessary. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss the consequences of the Digital Divide.

13.6 ECONOMICS AND POLICY ISSUES
Economics and policy issues play an important role in the development of any society. Information is not merely an input resource for effective socio- economic development planning; ensuring the optimal allocation and utilisation of all other resources is essential. Despite this vital characteristic of information about development planning, very few national development plans of developing countries have an information chapter, not even a separate budget line. Even within sectoral plans, one may not find a separate budget line for information. However, it is often reiterated that information is a national resource, and that national information policy and plan should be coordinated with or be derived from national development policy and programme. National development planning should recognise the information sector, like other economic sectors like agriculture, industry, science and technology, education, and culture. This will integrate information infrastructure development plans, understand the mutual influences between information and other sectors, provide data for the information economy, and formulate guidelines for apportioning national resources among information sector elements and other sectors. The level of information handling capability is a socio-economic indicator. Criteria for allocating resources for

Future of ICT4D producing, processing, distributing, and accessing transient information, such as commercial or stock market information, should be developed. Priority among information demands should be based on a country's socio-economic and cultural contexts and developmental stages. Economists can help develop a suitable classification of information processes once the concept of an information sector is accepted. Many considerations support policymaking towards development; they are: * Achieving and maintaining a stable economy through structural reforms * Reducing poverty through sustained economic growth and education * Investing in Infrastructure development and innovation * Increasing sustainable small and medium-scale business environment * Upskilling programmes to be included in school-level education. * Creating fair labour market opportunities * RTE (Right to Education) and RTI (Right to Information) ensure a more transparent governing system and inclusive development by decreasing the disparities. The right to information is a fundamental human right that influences information system design, networking, outsourcing, virtual team formation, and joint research. However, information processes operate imperfectly, and access to information does not equal all classes. The capacity for effective use of information differs significantly among individuals, classes, and nations. The use of information also depends on the environment, such as R&D, higher education, industrialisation, and commerce. The appropriateness of information accessed also influences the use of information. Efficient and effective use of information in a country also depends on the level of infrastructure development, which may vary within and among countries. Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Discuss the considerations that support policymaking towards
development.

13.7 LET US SUM UP
Knowledge has played a crucial role in human evolution, fostering creativity, logic, and decision-making. The evolution of communication from verbal to electronic interactions has revolutionised societal interactions. Information Economy and the Economics of Information are related but differ in scope.

The Internet has facilitated a shift towards a knowledge society, impacting Knowledge Society:
Developing Countries
factors like globalisation, human capital development, and infrastructure. Perspective Initiatives like UNESCO's aim to foster knowledge societies and Digital India highlight the role of digital empowerment in development. Changes include shifting from a production-based to a demand-based economy, with mass society focusing on customisation and personalisation. Digital technologies, media, news channels, and participatory journalism facilitate information access at the international level. However, the digital divide persists, posing access to digital tools and knowledge challenges. The consequences of the digital divide include disparities in education, healthcare, and the economy. Data security is essential to protect against cyber threats, and economic and policy issues focus on stability, poverty reduction, infrastructure investment, and fair labour market opportunities.
13.8 KEYWORDS
Idea: The product of thinking, reflecting, imagining, etc., got by the intellect by integrating with the aid of logic, a selection from the apperception mass, and/or what is directly apprehended by intuition and deposited in the memory (Ranganathan, 1967). Alternative term: Concept. Knowledge is the totality of ideas conserved by humans. In this sense, Knowledge is equivalent to the connotation of the term 'Universe of Ideas' (Ranganathan, 1967). Information: Information is "organised data which are (or rather can be) communicated" (Porat, 1977). Knowledge is information that has been assimilated, "appropriated", or has been meaningfully aggregated into a reservoir of facts and concepts that can be applied. WordNet defines 'Information' as a collection of facts from which conclusions may be drawn and knowledge acquired through study experience or instruction. Ranganathan defines information as an idea communicated by others or obtained by personal study and investigation. He adds, 'Knowledge and information are sometimes treated as synonyms. (Ranganathan, 1967). Communication: 'To communicate' is derived from 'to commune', which means to share. Information is the message carried through the communication medium (human or machine) by a communicative action. The communication process helps move, transfer, and circulate information from the point of its generation, recording, or location to the point of its potential use. Development: Development is the bridge between the hopes and aspirations of a people on the one hand and the realities of the world on the other. In this context, information and knowledge are the pillars of that bridge. Sustaining development is not a question of information or knowledge; both are required. "Development, even economic development is a knowledge-based process." (Boulding, 1966) Energy Axis: The investments in and undertakings for identifying energy sources, energy generation, storage, processing, transfer, use, and conservation (and the related economics and geopolitics).

Future of ICT4D Information: Communication Axis The investments in and undertakings for the generation, recording, storage, processing, accessing, communication, and use of information (and the related economics and geopolitics). Poverty Index: The index measures the percentage of households in a country deprived in three dimensions: monetary poverty, education, and basic infrastructure services, providing a comprehensive picture of poverty.
13.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bank, A. D. (2010). Information and Communication Technology for
Development. Asian Development Bank. https://www.adb.org/publications/information-and-communication- technology-development
2. Bornman, E. (2017). The international flow of information: Theories and
discourses. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.29262.87361
3. Bortnick, J. (n.d.-a). International Information Flow: The Developing
World Perspective.
4. Crandall, R. W. (2001). The Digital Divide: Bridging the Divide
Naturally. Brookings Review. Winter, pp. 38-41.5. Duff, A.S. (1997). Some Post-war Models of the Information Chain.
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science.29,179-87.6. Equity, Growth and Participation: The Information Age. (1993). Journal
of The Society For International Development. 3(3).
7. Florina, C. (2001). Crossing the Digital Divide. Executive Excellence. 4
January, pp. 2-3.8. Hammond, A., L. (2001). Digitally Empowered Development: The
Growing Gap. Foreign Affairs. 80(2), 96-102,
9. Knowledge societies: The way forward to build a better world.
UNESCO. https://en.unesco.org/70years/knowledge_societies_way_forward_better _world
10. Lehrer, K. (1990). Theory of knowledge. Westview Press.
11. Perkins, K. M. (2012). Sustainability and Innovation: Creating Change
that Engages the Workforce. The Journal of Corporate Citizenship, 46, 175-187.12. Safrankova, J. M., Sikyr, M., & Skypalova, R. (2020). Innovations in
Workforce Management: Challenges in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Marketing and Management of Innovations, 2, 85-94. https://doi.org/10.21272/mmi.2020.2-06
13. Singer, B. D. (1973). Mass Society, Mass Media, and the Transformation
of Minority Identity. The British Journal of Sociology, 24(2), 140-150. https://doi.org/10.2307/588374.13.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE Knowledge Society:
Developing Countries
ANSWERS Perspective
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Discuss the role of knowledge in human evolution.
Knowledge significantly influences human evolution, shaping both biologically and culturally. Early humans demonstrated cognitive abilities through tool use and innovation, leading to the development of sophisticated tools. Cultural transmission of knowledge about tool- making and use facilitated efficient sharing and transfer, fostering social cohesion. Knowledge within communities, such as hunting techniques and medicinal plant use, contributed to group survival. Environmental knowledge enabled adaptation to ecosystems, while technology and innovation led to advancements in tools and agriculture.
2. Explain the role of Digital empowerment in development.
Digital empowerment is crucial for societal development, contributing to economic, social, and cultural progress. It involves using digital technologies to enhance individuals' capabilities and engage in the digital landscape. Access to digital tools is essential, but challenges persist in ensuring full accessibility. Digital literacy is essential in a knowledge society. Initiatives like UNESCO and national programs like Digital India emphasise the importance of digital empowerment. Still, challenges like the digital divide, data theft, and privacy need to be addressed for inclusive development. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Discuss the status of Digital India in terms of development.
The Digital India initiative launched in 2015, aimed to transform India into a digitally empowered society and knowledge economy. Key achievements include expanding internet access, enhancing digital literacy, promoting e-governance, and digital payments. Other key achievements include cybersecurity, rural connectivity, digitising health records, developing smart cities, and launching the MyGov platform for citizen participation in governance. Check Your Progress: 3
1. How do ICT tools transform society?
ICT tools have revolutionised society by accelerating learning, boosting productivity, enabling global communication, and transforming work culture. They provide access to vast information, facilitating knowledge creation, collaboration, and streamlining processes. They break down geographical barriers, fostering global partnerships and work continuity. ICT tools also democratise access to information, allowing smaller units to compete with larger ones. Digital India initiatives, like UPI, support SMEs in India. However, challenges like poor infrastructure, insufficient training, and data security persist.

Future of ICT4D Check Your Progress: 4
1. Discuss the consequences of the Digital Divide.
The digital divide, characterised by unequal access to digital tools and the Internet, significantly impacts education, healthcare, and the economy. It exacerbates existing inequalities, particularly in underserved communities, and has been exacerbated by the pandemic. Economic disparities are also exacerbated, as individuals without adequate digital literacy miss out on opportunities for online employment, digital entrepreneurship, and e-commerce. The digital divide also deepens social and cultural divides, and workforce challenges arise due to limited digital access and skills. Gender disparities are also a concern. Check Your Progress: 5
1. Discuss the considerations that support policy-making for development.
* Achieving and maintaining a stable economy through structural reforms * Reducing poverty through sustained economic growth and education * Investing in Infrastructure development and innovation * Increasing sustainable small and medium-scale business environment * Upskilling programmes to be included in school-level education. * Creating fair labour market opportunities * RTE (Right to Education) and RTI (Right to Information) ensure a more transparent governing system and inclusive development by decreasing the disparities. The right to information is a fundamental human right that influences information system design, networking, outsourcing, virtual team formation, and joint research. However, information processes operate imperfectly, and access to information does not equal all classes. The capacity for effective use of information differs significantly among individuals, classes, and nations. The use of information also depends on the environment, such as R&D, higher education, industrialisation, and commerce. The appropriateness of information accessed also influences the use of information. Efficient and effective use of information in a country also depends on the level of infrastructure development, which may vary within and among countries.

UNIT 14 E-GOVERNANCE POLICY AND E-Governance Policy
and Framework
FRAMEWORK
Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Introduction to Information Technology
14.3 Principles of Information System Management
14.4 Introduction to e-Governance and Digital Transformation, Meaning,
Definition, Benefits & Limitations
14.5 History of E-Governance
14.6 Benefits of E-Governance
14.7 Models of E-Governance - Weidner's Dissemination model, Critical
Flow Model, Comparative Analysis Model, Interactive Service
Model, Mobilisation and Lobbying Model
14.8 E-Governance Projects and Public-Private Partnerships
14.9 Digital Divide- Meaning, Definition, Parameters, Types, Causes,
Bridging Digital Divide
14.10 Opportunities and Challenges of E-Governance
14.11 Let Us Sum Up
14.12 Key Words
14.13 Further Reading
14.14 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
This unit is concerned with acquainting the learners with some of the pertinent concepts related to e-governance, how it works, and the broad areas under which it functions. The challenges of e-governance considering the different political arrangements and technological borders will be assessed, and the learners can deliver ideas of its functionality. It will also lead to an
understanding of Information Technology and Information System
Management. Again, to get a proper overview of the subject matter, we need to understand the different models of e-governance and their theoretical perspectives. Learners will be able to distinguish between projects and public-private partnerships and gain knowledge on the digital divide and the challenges in a changing world.
14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to * Identify the concepts and objectives of studying e-governance; 229

Future of ICT4D * Discuss the subject matter, nature and scope of Information technology
and E-governance;
* Describe the theoretical concepts of E-governance; * Discuss the factors and challenges of the digital divide; and * Connect the challenges and opportunities of e-governance.
14.2 INTRODUCTION TO INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
The mechanism and software used to generate, accumulate, transfer, manipulate, and exhibit data and information are collectively called information technology, or IT. In a literal sense, IT is vital to the Information Age and relates to all aspects of communications and computing. History and evolution of information technology The last ten years of the 20th century were the best and the worst for public service education. The abacus in Babylonia in the fourth century BC is usually discussed when discussing the history of those devices intended to count objects and generate data. However, the Atanasoff-Berry Computer (ABC), the first electrical digital computer in history, 1942 marked the beginning of computing and IT in the United States. Computers did not replace conventional accounting and record-keeping practices until after World War II, despite ABC's reintroduction and the Electronic Numerical Integrator Analyzer and Computer (ENIAC) deployment to help with firing table preparation. Soon after the transistors replaced vacuum tubes in the 1950s, computer reliability rose, the hardware and software evolved, and their evolutionary paths were slightly different in the past. Electrical engineers created the hardware, and every new generation of computing technology was adapted and used in industry and government. The creation of software applications has a history that parallels various noteworthy management changes in the public sector and marks the beginning of the growth of management reporting. The technology combined began to advance the public sector beyond data processing in the 1960s, initiating a different e-government era.
14.3 PRINCIPLES OF INFORMATION SYSTEM
MANAGEMENT
The gradual evolution from Information Technology to Information System Management led to a massive shift in the structure and function of E- Governance. Information System Management refers to any framework of software that facilitates the collection, storage, organisation, and distribution of information. Information management encompasses a series of organisational activities related to acquiring, storing, and distributing information to stakeholders.

14.4 INTRODUCTION TO E-GOVERNANCE AND E-Governance Policy
and Framework
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
Administrative machinery is conducted through information technology or digital intervention called e-governance. The term governance originates from an ancient Greek word, "Kebernon," meaning steering. Governing in current use means directing, regulating, and manipulating from a position of authority. In 2002, The UN addressed e-Governance and signified five categories for measuring progress towards e-Governance.
1. Emerging online presence: Sites providing reliable information
2. Enhanced Online Presence: Increasing quantity of webpages providing
dynamic content
3. Interactive Web presence: Electronic exchanges between users and
governments
4. Transactional Web presence: Services like payments (taxes) and
purchases (licences)
5. A fully integrated online presence that combines services, information,
and exchanges
14.5 HISTORY OF E-GOVERNANCE IN INDIA
The Indian government founded the Department of Electronics in the 1970s, and the National Informatics Centre (NIC) was established in 1977, marking the beginning of the country's transition to electronic governance. Government offices had computers by the 1980s; however, they were just used for drafting. Eventually, this expanded to include internal government applications in various administrative fields, system monitoring, growth, and information and technology to manage data-intensive tasks like tax administration, elections, and censuses. E-Governance can be of different types depending on the type of governmental structure as well as the a. Government to Customer (G2C): E-Governance is to provide ICT organisation consistently and effectively to inhabitants. This establishes a link between the government and people utilising the technology. b. Government To Employees (G2E) E-Governance to Employee partnership (G2E) is the online association between online instruments, sources, information, and products that support communication between the government and its companies. c. Government To Government (G2G) Government-to-government (G2G) is the access to common information and data framework between administration offices, divisions, or associations. It improves access sharing and information retention. d. Government To Business (G2B) This is primarily determined by how professionally the work with state

Future of ICT4D bodies of various levels is organised and how well the government bodies build the processes. The government-to-business (G2B) model implies that it is designed to support and develop businesses from the government's side.
14.6 BENEFITS OF GOVERNANCE
E-Governance has several benefits as it has its hindsight. In a country like India, e-governance can have several benefits. Primary among them are automation issues. To put it together, some of the leading points are: Automation: It leads to the improvisation of clerical functions, which are also error-free to a considerable extent. Informatisation: E-governance leads to clarity in steady information-flow processes. For example, it can store, access, and archive most information. Prompt decision-making: Because of the automation of processes and the application of accurate facts, there is fast delivery because of prompt decision-making, communication, and implementation. Cost efficient: The Governance that emanates from the ICT-moderated process tends to be cheaper, producing the same outputs at a lower total cost. Quality gains: Governance works better by producing the same outputs at the exact total cost but to a higher quality standard. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write about the history of e-Governance in India.

2. What are the benefits of e-Governance? Substantiate with examples.

14.7 MODELS OF E-GOVERNANCE WEIDNER'S
DISSEMINATION MODE, CRITICAL FLOW
MODEL
a. Weidner's Dissemination model E-Governance functions differently, considering the outcome's expected nature and the beneficiaries involved. One such model is Weidner's

Dissemination model. This model establishes the conditions of prior E-Governance Policy
and Framework
preference, particularly in the case of legal or judicial decision-making, and this is primarily used to influence decisions by setting up precedence. Most commonly, this e-governance model assesses the performance of a particular public servant, ministry, or government. By promoting background know-how, this model provides rationality for the future course of action. This model also provides a precursor for future courses of action, picking up from the e-government guiding principles and procedures in the past. ICT unlocks access to local knowledge and global products at a meagre cost. This model provides information on predecessor governments' or electoral candidates' performance by sharing their work records in their constituencies. This model offers room for strong arguments emanating from the analysis. b. Critical flow model of e-governance The critical flow model is based on disseminating crucial information to the targeted people through convergent media or ICT. This emphasises the data's relevance and the necessity of using it. This remains functional in both private and public domains. The key idea of this model is to promote transparency to implement good governance. It tries to diminish the element of time and distance and minimise the abuse of power by the government. The model can work in areas like availing policies commissioned by the government to the people, acquiring research studies, and processing inquiry reports. There could be other advantages, such as obtaining records of human rights violations and criminal impeachment against government officials to concerned citizens and non-governmental organisations and facilitating information on the corruption of government officials or ministries to the electoral bodies or any relevant governing council. The model may not work properly in instances where the government bodies do not encourage public contributions and criticise all information of a critical nature or maintain tight control over all information and remain available to only a few top levels of the government. c. Comparative Analysis model The Comparative Knowledge Model, becoming increasingly popular, is one of the most used yet fundamental models for emerging nations. By comparing instances of poor governance with those of good administration and then examining the various facets of bad governance and its effects on the populace, the model can be utilised to empower individuals. The concept is predicated on using ICT for information exploration and comparison with existing information sets, whether in the public or private domain. The result is discussions and strategic learning. For example, if a certain sum of money can be used to create "5" schools in village "A," why can the same amount of money only be used to establish "2" schools in village "B"? d. Interactive Service model The governance-to-citizen Government model is another name for the interactive-service system of governance. This paradigm, which allows

Future of ICT4D for direct public participation in the digital governing process, is an amalgam of several e-government models. This concept uses ICT to integrate everyone into a knowledge network, providing interactive communication media. G2C2G entirely takes advantage of ICT's potential to use it for increased efficiency and transparency, participation in government operations, and cost and time savings in the decision- making process. Through this concept, citizens can access all government services since it establishes a channel for tasks like filing tax returns, communicating concerns, and government procurement, to name a few. e. Mobilisation and lobbying model It is the most popular e-governance paradigm and has consistently aided civil society organisations in influencing international decision-making processes, particularly in poor nations. The mobilisation model's foundation is the strategic, focused flow of information intended to fortify action and forge powerful allies. It takes a proactive stance in creating online communities that encourage active information exchange and sharing common ideals. The strength of this model and the resources and ideas brought together through virtual networks is the diversity of these virtual communities. The lobbying strategy can successfully surmount institutional, regional, and administrative obstacles to compel strict action.
14.8 E-GOVERNANCE PROJECTS AND PUBLIC-
PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
Public-private partnerships are collaborations between the public and private sectors to create, organise, fund, build, and/or manage projects customarily considered to be under the purview of the government sector. As the PPP model becomes more widely accepted, it quickly spreads to every aspect of public life, including ICT. Public-private partnerships in E-governance can a. We enhance communication between public entities, intergovernmental organisations, private businesses, and international relationships. b. Ensured high-quality services are expected. c. Enhancing government services necessitates the use of improved processes or systems. d. Improve governance and transparency. e. Giving government employees more authority at the implementation and administrative levels Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.

1. Write about the Weidner's Dissemination model. How is it relevant for E-Governance Policy
and Framework
government functioning?

2. Discuss the significance of the critical flow model. What are the
advantages of this model?

14.9 DIGITAL DIVIDE: MEANING, DEFINITION,
PARAMETERS, CAUSES
The Digital Divide refers to the division of technological privileges between the haves and the have-nots. While this divide works on technology, it also has other core elements in modern times. Material access: The core element of the digital divide is based on physical access to personal computers and the Internet among demographic categories that are obvious in this respect: income, education, age, sex, and ethnicity. Usability access: Regarding digital technology, the core difference is between the 'have-nots' and the element of usability. Despite the concept of usability, it is rather significant to understand that most communities do not understand the applicability of digital technology despite access to it. Some studies have found that the refusal to use computers and get connected to the Internet was:
- no need or significant usage opportunities;
- no time or liking;
- rejection of the medium (the Internet and computer games as 'dangerous'
media);
- lack of money;
Skills access After acquiring the motivation to use computers and some kind of physical access to them, one has to learn to manage the hardware and software. According to the model in Fig. 1, the problem of a lack of skills might appear here. This problem is framed with terms such as 'computer, information or multimedia literacy' and 'computer skills' or 'information capital. ' Usage access Actual usage of digital media is the final stage and ultimate goal of the total appropriation process of technology, which is called access in this article. 235

Future of ICT4D Having sufficient motivation, physical access, and skills to apply digital media are necessary but not sufficient conditions for actual use. Usage has its grounds or determinants. As a dependent factor, it can be measured in at least four ways:
1. usage time;
2. usage applications and diversity;
3. broadband or narrowband use;
4. more or less active or creative use.
Bridging Digital Divide
Over one billion people live in India, and 70% do so in villages. According to the report published by the National Survey of India, the literacy rate of India is 77.7 per cent, with males being 84.70 % and women being 70.30%. Even though the information and communication technology (ICT) sector is robust and expanding quickly, access to ICTs is still quite limited, especially in rural areas. Some requirements must be met for every revolution to occur. India has not yet created the supportive atmosphere needed for the digital revolution. The infrastructure is the primary bottleneck. Infrastructure factors like energy and IT restrict access to technologies. As of 2023, while the infrastructure has developed considerably, there are still jarring gaps in the skills available to utilise the resources and in some significant pockets, there are psychological barriers that limit the application of the apps. The major areas which need to be addressed are. a. Infrastructural knowledge b. Breaking the psychological qualms over applying IT c. Creating a fertile ground for skill development
14.10 OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGE OF E-
GOVERNANCE IN INDIA
Building Infrastructures: Significant efforts would need to be made to gather the resources required for this difficult task. Governments could organise computer leasing agreements as a means of addressing the issue. This would lower the initial large capital expenditures. Improved Connectivity: Creating total connectivity across all ministries and departments will enable the efficient speed of the Internet to be used for transferring files and paperwork instead of manual labour. Databases from different departments must be interoperable for this to be truly successful. For citizens to benefit from IT daily, interoperability of e-governance projects is crucial. Information flow: Information flow is smooth when provided to the public in a language they can comprehend and feel at ease with, typically the native tongue. Since technology exists, translating text from English into other languages is possible. As a result, the issue is controllable as long as there is sufficient drive to complete this difficult task.

Breaking the stereotypes: Getting government workers accustomed to E-Governance Policy
and Framework
working exclusively manually to adopt a new perspective. This is a significant task that requires careful planning and perseverance. It is necessary to arrange training sessions, workshops, and seminars to raise awareness among staff members at all levels. Creating Cyber awareness: Disseminating cyber laws to the public as soon as feasible to grant IT systems information documents the same legal standing as papers currently kept on paper and Encouraging power infrastructures: Encouraging electricity infrastructures and all-weather surface transportation systems to close the digital divide in India between rural and urban areas. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Elaborate on the digital divide and its different types.

2. What are the essential Opportunities and Challenges of E-Governance in
India?

14.11 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we have discussed the key features of E-governance and its characteristics. We have analysed the different types of e-government, the history and evolution of its course, and the areas maintained by e- government. The unit has defined the concepts of Digital Divide and the different challenges and opportunities that arise from it. It has also discussed the areas of public-private collaboration in terms of e-government and the various dimensions of e-government.
14.12 KEYWORDS
E-filing: Electronic filing is the way to submit assessment forms over the web utilising tax preparation software that has been pre-approved by a significant expense authority, for example, the IRS or the Canada Revenue agency. E-voting: Electronic voting utilises electronic voting to deal with throwing and tallying votes. 'SMART Governance: The future of public services, increased efficiency,

Future of ICT4D group engagement, interactive work, and ongoing improvement through creativity are all referred to as "smart governance." E-participation: E-participation is "the process of involving citizens in policy and decision-making through ICTs to make public administration inclusive, collaborative, deliberative, and participatory for intrinsic and instrumental ends." E-participation: E-participation is defined as "the process of engaging citizens through ICTs in policy and decision-making to make public administration participatory, inclusive, collaborative and deliberative for intrinsic and instrumental end.
14.13 FURTHER READING
1. Chinn, M. D. (2003). The Determinants of the Global Digital Divide: A
Cross-Country Analysis of Computer and Internet.
2. Heeks, R. (2001). Understanding E-Governance for development. SSRN
Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3540058
3. Hildreth, W. B., Miller, G. J., & Rabin, J. (2006). Handbook of public
administration (3rd ed.). CRC Press
4. Kaliannan, M., Awang, H., & Raman, M. (2007). Technology adoption
in the public sector. Proceedings of the 1st international conference on Theory and practice of electronic governance. https://doi.org/
10.1145/1328057.1328103
5. Marche, S., & McNiven, J. D. (2003). E-government and
E-governance: The future isn't what it used to be. Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences / Revue Canadienne des Sciences de l'Administration, 20(1), 74-86. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1936-4490.2003. tb00306.x
6. Monga, A. (2008). E-government in India: Opportunities and challenges,
JOAAG, Vol. 3. No. 2
7. Nath, V. (2000). Digital governance.
https://www.cddc.vt.edu/digitalgov/gov-e-comparative-model.html
8. Sumathy, M. (2020). A Handbook of E-Governance. Abhijit
Publications, New Delhi.
9. Rao, S. S. (2005). Bridging the digital divide: Efforts in India.
Telematics and Informatics, 22(4), 361-375. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2005.01.007
14.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. In the 1970s, the government of India established the Department of
Electronics, followed by the National Informatics Centre (NIC) in 1977, thereby initiating the process of e-governance in India. By the 1980s, 238 government offices were equipped with computers but were limited to

drafting. Eventually, this spread out to in-house government applications E-Governance Policy
and Framework
in diverse administration areas, system monitoring, expansion and the application of information and technology to administer data-intensive functions related to elections, census, tax administration, etc.
2. E-Governance has several benefits as it has its hindsight. In a country
like India, e-governance can have several benefits. Primary among them are automation issues. To put it together, some of the leading points are: Automation: It leads to the improvisation of clerical functions. Informatisation: E-governance leads to clarity in steady information- flow processes. For example, it can store, access, and archive most information. Prompt decision-making: Because of the automation of processes and the application of accurate facts, there is fast delivery because of prompt decision-making, communication, and implementation. Cost efficient: The Governance that emanates from the ICT-moderated process tends to be cheaper, producing the same outputs at a lower total cost.
3. Quality gains: Governance that works better: producing the same
outputs at the exact total cost at the same time, but to a higher quality standard. Check Your Progress: 2
1. E-Governance functions differently, considering the outcome's expected
nature and the beneficiaries involved. One such model is Weidner's Dissemination model. This model establishes the conditions of prior preference, particularly in the case of legal or judicial decision-making, and this is primarily used to influence decisions by setting up precedence. Most commonly, this e-governance model assesses the performance of a particular public servant, ministry, or government. By promoting background know-how, this model provides rationality for the future course of action. This model also provides a precursor for future courses of action, picking up from the e-government guiding principles and procedures in the past. ICT unlocks access to local knowledge and global products at a meagre cost. This model provides information on predecessor governments' or electoral candidates' performance by sharing their work records in their constituencies. This model offers room for strong arguments emanating from the analysis.
2. The critical flow model is based on disseminating crucial information to
the targeted people through convergent media or ICT. This emphasises the data's relevance and the necessity of using it. This remains functional in both private and public domains. The key idea of this model is to promote transparency to implement good governance. It tries to diminish the element of time and distance and minimise the abuse of power by the government. The model can work in areas like availing policies commissioned by the government to the people, acquiring research

Future of ICT4D studies, and processing inquiry reports. There could be other advantages, such as obtaining records of human rights violations and criminal impeachment against government officials to concerned citizens and non-governmental organisations. Facilitating information on the corruption of government officials or ministries to the electoral bodies or any relevant governing council Check Your Progress: 3
1. The Digital Divide refers to the division of technological privileges
between the haves and the have-nots. While this divide works on technology, it also has other core elements in modern times. Material access: The core element of the digital divide is based on physical access to personal computers and the Internet among demographic categories that are obvious in this respect: income, education, age, sex, and ethnicity. Usability access The core difference between digital technology and 'have-nots' is the element of usability. Despite the concept of usability, it is rather significant to understand that most communities do not understand the applicability of digital technology despite access to it. Some studies have found that the refusal to use computers and get connected to the Internet was:
- no need or significant usage opportunities;
- no time or liking;
- rejection of the medium (the Internet and computer games as
'dangerous' media);
- lack of money;
Skills access After acquiring the motivation to use computers and some kind of physical access to them, one has to learn to manage the hardware and software. According to the model in Fig. 1, the problem of a lack of skills might appear here. This problem is framed with terms such as 'computer, information or multimedia literacy' and 'computer skills' or 'information capital. ' Usage access Actual usage of digital media is the final stage and goal of the total appropriation process of technology, which is called access in this article. Having sufficient motivation, physical access, and skills to apply digital media are necessary but not sufficient conditions for actual use. Usage has its grounds or determinants. As a dependent factor, it can be measured in at least four ways:
1. usage time;
240 2. usage applications and diversity;

3. broadband or narrowband use; E-Governance Policy
and Framework
4. more or less active or creative use
2. Building Infrastructures: Significant efforts would need to be made to
gather the resources needed for this difficult task. Governments could organise computer leasing agreements to address the issue, lowering the initial large capital expenditures.
3. Improved Connectivity: Creating total connectivity across all ministries
and departments will enable the Internet to transfer files and paperwork efficiently in place of manual labour. Databases from different departments must be interoperable for this to be truly successful. For citizens to benefit from IT daily, interoperability of e-governance projects is crucial.
4. Information flow: Information flow is smooth when provided to the
public in a language they can comprehend and feel at ease with, typically the native tongue. Since technology exists, translating text from English into other languages is possible. As a result, the issue is controllable as long as there is sufficient drive to complete this difficult task.
5. Breaking the stereotypes: Getting government workers accustomed to
working exclusively manually to adopt a new perspective. This is a significant task that requires careful planning and perseverance. It is necessary to arrange training sessions, workshops, and seminars to raise awareness among staff members at all levels.
6. Creating Cyber awareness: Disseminating cyber laws to the public as
soon as feasible to grant IT systems information documents the same legal standing as papers currently kept on paper and
7. Encouraging power infrastructures: Encouraging electricity
infrastructures and all-weather surface transportation systems to close the digital divide in India between rural and urban areas.


======================================================================
=== SOURCE: MNM-034E.pdf ===
======================================================================

MNM - 034
Mobile Journalism
MOBILE JOURNALISM

Disclaimer: Any materials and images adapted from web-based resources in this self-learning course material are being used for educational purposes only and not for commercial purposes.
PROGRAMME COORDINATOR: PROF. K.S. ARUL SELVAN
BLOCK 1
Unit 1 Dr. Aakanksha Sharma Unit 3 & Dr. Sujeet kumar
& 2 13
Programme Specialist Internews Assistant Professor Department of
India Jaipur Mass Communication and Media
Central University of South Bihar
(formerly Central University of
Bihar), Gaya, Bihar
Unit 4 Dr. Sudarshan Yadav Unit 6 Dr. Guna Graciyal
& 5 & 7
Assistant Professor, Department PG Department of Journalism
of Journalism and Mass and Communication, Dwaraka
Communication, Central Doss Goverdhan Doss Vaishnav
University of Jharkhand, Ranchi College, Arumbakkam, Chennai
Unit 8 Adopted from MAJMC of Unit 9 & Dr. Huma Parveen
SOCIS, IGNOU 14
Assistant Professor Department
of Mass Communication Aligarh
Muslim University, Aligarh
Unit 10 Dr. Abhay Chawla Unit 11 Arushi Bhatnagar
Assistant Professor Script Writer and RJ
Department of Media Studies, Radio Madhuban, Mount Abu,
GGSIP University, New Delhi, Rajasthan
Unit 12 Dr. Kritika Agrawal
Assistant Professor
Department of Mass
Communication
Babu Banarasi Das University,
Lucknow
PRINT PRODUCTION
Mr. Sanjay Agarwal
Assistant Registrar, MPDD
IGNOU, New Delhi
July, 2024 (c) Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2024
ISBN:
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, with- out permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. Laser typeset by: Akashdeep Printer Printed at :

COURSE CONTENTS
MNM-034 MOBILE JOURNALISM
BLOCK 1 MOBILE AND SOCIETY Page No.
Unit 1 Mobile As A Medium 11
Unit 2 Mobile Nations: Access And Reach 25
Unit 3 Mobile And News Media 37
Unit 4 Benefits Of Mobile Journalism 58
Unit 5 Mobile News Consumption Patterns 76
BLOCK 2 UNDERSTANDING MOJO
Unit 6 Landscape Of Mobile Journalism 101
Unit 7 Mobile Multimedia Basics 117
Unit 8 Introduction To Mobile Apps 131
Unit 9 Apps For Mojo 144
Unit 10 Mobile Journalism Equipment 165
BLOCK 3 MOBILE JOURNALISM PRODUCTION PROCESS
Unit 11 Reporting With Smartphones 187
Unit 12 Scripting For Mojo Stories 202
Unit 13 Mobile News Packaging 217
Unit 14 Mobile Editing And Production 234

MNM034 COURSE INTRODUCTION: MOBILE
JOURNALISM
India is considered a mobile nation, with nearly 94% of the population accessing telecom connectivity. With the increasing Internet usage through mobile gaining traction in the country, many media houses have already started incorporating mobile-based news operations. Popularly, it is called MOJO for mobile journalism; in this course, we have invariably used Mojo for mobile journalism. Since it is handy and capable of helping many of us generate multimedia content, it is noteworthy to fine-tune our understanding of this generic knowledge for journalistic practices. With this background information, this course, Mobile Journalism, comprises 14 Units segmented under three distinctive blocks. In Block 1, Introduction: Mobile and Society, we introduce the concept of mobile technology in contemporary society, mainly focusing on India's dynamic landscape. Unit 1 provides the groundwork by examining mobile communication as a multifaceted medium, exploring its characteristics, advantages, and legal considerations while analysing its societal implications, especially in journalism. Unit 2 analyses the transformative force of mobile connectivity, reshaping how we access information and navigate our daily lives globally. In Unit 3, we scrutinise the symbiotic relationship between mobile technology and news dissemination in India, where smartphones are gaining supreme as the primary source of news consumption. Unit 4 highlights Mobile Journalism (MoJo), revolutionising news production and consumption through innovative storytelling methods facilitated by mobile devices. Finally, Unit 5 explores the dynamic landscape of mobile news consumption, highlighting its pivotal role as the sixth mass media and its implications for society's information consumption habits and media landscape. In this Block, you will gain a nuanced understanding of mobile technology's pervasive influence and its implications for contemporary society. In Block 2, Understanding Mojo, we examine how smartphones have metamorphosed from mere communication devices into indispensable tools for news dissemination. Unit 6 sets the stage by dissecting the Landscape of Mobile Journalism, discussing its structure and profound impact on the media landscape. From traditional news gathering to citizen journalism, you will explore the symbiotic relationship between users and their devices, navigating through emerging technologies and social media integration. In Unit 7, Mobile Multimedia Basics, the focus shifts to mobile multimedia's fundamental components and dynamics, examining audio, video, and graphics and their integration with cloud computing. Unit 8 introduces you to Mobile Applications, tracing their evolution and impact on various domains. In contrast, Unit 9, "Apps for MoJo," equips you with practical skills in mobile journalism, exploring diverse app categories for modern storytelling. Unit 10, Mobile Journalism Equipment, provides insights into essential tools and techniques, emphasising innovation and adaptability in this dynamic field. Block 3: Mobile Journalism Production Process, In this Block, we explore its transformative impact on journalism. Unit 11 discusses the pivotal role of smartphones in reshaping news gathering and dissemination, navigating through

the intricacies of smartphone reporting and ethical considerations. Unit 12 sheds light on the revolutionary shift in Mobile Journalism stories, especially in crises, and unravels the art of scriptwriting tailored for MoJo narratives. Moving forward, Unit 13 explains the nuances of mobile news packaging, equipping students with skills in small-screen storytelling, multimedia integration, and ethical digital reporting practices. Unit 14 underscores the significance of mobile editing and production skills, empowering journalists to harness the full potential of their devices for impactful storytelling and media dissemination in the ever-evolving landscape of contemporary journalism. With mobile devices becoming an integral part of many people's lives, this course will give you a space to learn the intricacies of Mobile Journalism and equip you with essential skills for navigating this dynamic landscape.

BLOCK 1
MOBILE AND SOCIETY

BLOCK 1 INTRODUCTION: MOBILE AND
SOCIETY
In the traditional mass communication degree programme, mainstream media occupies a significant curriculum focus. However, in the past two decades, that scenario has changed dramatically. We started engaging with the mobile medium more intimately than newspapers, television, or radio. Actually, we started receiving and reading news through various apps and having opportunities to watch important events through streaming Apps. In this Block, you will understand the whole gamut of mobile technology as a communication medium and its relationships and associations with individuals, communities, and social sectors.
Unit 1: Mobile as a Medium, In an era where mobile phones are omnipresent,
especially in India with its staggering number of connections, this Unit is a comprehensive exploration of mobile communication as a medium. From understanding its characteristics to assessing its advantages and disadvantages, you will explore the complexities of mobile technology. Legal considerations, safety protocols, and the evolving landscape of mobile journalism will be scrutinised, equipping learners with a nuanced understanding of this ubiquitous medium and its societal implications. Through this Unit, you will develop a holistic understanding of mobile communication, empowering them to navigate its intricacies responsibly and effectively.
Unit 2: Mobile Nations, In this Unit, we will learn the landscape of mobile
connectivity, a ubiquitous force shaping our digital society. At its core, mobile connectivity revolutionises how we access information, communicate, and navigate our daily lives. We are browsing the Internet seamlessly through smartphones and tablets, enabling various activities from entertainment to education, banking to agriculture. This Unit begins by examining the global mobile scenario and highlighting the significance of access and its multifaceted implications. We'll understand the advantages of high mobile penetration while dissecting its challenges, accompanied by thoughtful solutions.
Unit 3: Mobile and News Media, we will discuss the relationship between
mobile technology and news dissemination in India. With smartphones dominating the landscape, constituting 72% of news consumption compared to 35% via computers, India is a paradigmatic "mobile-first" market for news. Popular apps like Google News, Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint exemplify the convenience and accessibility of curated content on mobile platforms. The transformative impact of mobile technology is underscored by the immediacy and accessibility it affords, reflected in concise formats like short articles, videos, and infographics catering to truncated attention spans.
Unit 4: Benefits of Mobile Journalism, we will explore Mobile Journalism
(MoJo), a transformative force in news production and consumption. Through the lens of mobile devices like smartphones and tablets, MoJo enables journalists to swiftly capture, edit, and share news content, revolutionising traditional practices. You will uncover the multifaceted benefits of MoJo for media institutions, newsrooms, professionals, consumers, and prosumers alike.

From facilitating real-time reporting to fostering audience engagement, MoJo's versatility empowers journalists to transcend geographical limitations and embrace innovative storytelling methods. Through platform-specific insights into photography, audio bytes/podcasts, and video bytes/streaming, you will grasp the profound impact of MoJo in shaping the contemporary landscape of journalism.
Unit 5: Apps for Mojo, we explore the dynamic landscape of mobile news
consumption. In today's digital age, imagine leisurely scrolling through your social media feed when suddenly a headline catches your eye, drawing you into the latest news article on your mobile device. Mobile news has transcended mere trend status to become the sixth mass media, offering customisable feeds, seamless social network integration, and instant updates anytime, anywhere. Through this Unit, we will explore mobile news consumption, analysing its impact on society, its challenges, and its future trajectory in the media landscape. Through handheld devices, we are connecting with the globe. That's the scenario currently attracting young audiences from mainstream media to Apps. Significant changes might change the gamut of the communication process in the long term. It will be quite interesting to examine this transformation through this course.

UNIT 1 MOBILE AS A MEDIUM
Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Learning Outcomes
1.2 Characteristics of mobile as a medium
1.2.1 Mobile Generations and Characteristics
1.2.2 AR, VR, AI and Other Formats
1.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Mobile Communication
1.4 Rights, Laws and Dangers
1.4.1 Dangers in the Mobile World
1.4.2 Mobile Gaming and Addiction
1.4. 3 Do's and Don'ts of Mobile Communication
1.5 News and Mobile Journalism (MoJo)
1.6 Let Us Sum Up
1.7 Keywords
1.8 Further Readings
1.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Mobile phones are everywhere. India has a staggering 1.10 billion mobile connections, representing 77% of the population. Over 90% of these use their mobile device to access the internet, spending Three hours 55 minutes to do so . In the year 2023, we had 692 million internet users in India. Of these, 467 million used social media. More than 398 million adults (40.2% of the 18+ population) used social media in 2023.2024 India will roll out a 5G connection to bolster rural connectivity and
mobile broadband. We are all familiar with the characteristics of a mobile. It is accessible (widely available), easy to use (user-friendly), immediate (fast, instant) and multi-purpose. Today, India is the second largest mobile telephony network after China. Internet Services (ITeS) delivered through mobile phones have enabled the government to use mobiles to double up as touch points in remote places where it is a challenge to reach the local community. This mass reach and availability of mobile phones has allowed it to become a preferred medium to access news and information, with 72% accessing news through smartphones and 35% via computers. Users spend around two hours and 50 minutes on social media out of every six hours and 23 minutes on the internet. The average time spent on mobile phone usage is four hours 51 minutes. There are 28.89 billion downloads of mobile apps in 2023 in India. It is not surprising

Mobile And Society that mobiles are gaining traction as a medium of storytelling among social media influencers, journalists and citizen journalists. The diversity of formats, easy accessibility and popularity of the mobile phone makes it an obvious choice for anyone with a story to share with the world.
1.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Develop an understanding of the characteristics of mobile as a medium; * Explore the advantages and disadvantages of using mobiles; * Examine the rights, laws and issues around using mobiles in India; * Learn about various techniques and steps to keep yourself safe while using mobiles; and * Comprehend the merits and demerits of mobile journalism.
1.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF MOBILE AS A
MEDIUM
1.2.1 Mobile Generations and Characteristics
Today, the mobile phone is not just an enabler of technology-led services; it allows people-to-people communication through voice, text and video. The mobile has transformed into a 'smartphone'. From its humble beginnings in 1997, when the Swedish telephone manufacturer Ericsson first used the term to introduce its new device, it has been transformed repeatedly. Now, we can access various services such as banking, financial transactions and social media through smartphones. However, not all mobiles are smartphones. Most cell phones are feature phones. A feature phone is usually non-touch based and may have a simple display, limited internet access capabilities and longer battery life. They may have a camera, a radio and simple games. The technology behind the smartphone is simple. A mobile device is programmed to catch a mobile network and allow users to access services via the internet or mobile networks. While phones were previously 2G or 3G, newer models are 4G and 5G. The very first form of data to be transferred over mobiles was voice. The first phones could merely be used for talking to one another. The second generation or 2G phones from 1991 could share SMS, pictures and MMS with speeds of up to 50 KBPS. The third and most advanced generation, the 3G, came in 1998 and significantly increased internet speeds to 2 MBPS 3G enabled voice calling and the mobile internet access you see today. However, 4G, or the fourth generation of networking, was launched in 2008 and facilitated mobile gaming, mobile television, video conferencing, and GPS with up to 1 GBPS speeds. Today, 5th-generation mobile technology has been made available in India. The government can launch many services using technologies such as smartphone-based authentication for daily wage earners and RuPay (an electronic payment system that includes credit and debit cards and UPI payments).

Regardless of the specifics, both features and smartphones have some common Mobile As A Medium characteristics.
1. Portable and wireless, they can be carried easily from place to place,
making it easier to access voice and instant messages regardless of location. (The catch is that you must be in an area that receives mobile signals.)
2. Instant/Immediate: While media such as newspapers and magazines take
some time to reach their audiences, digital versions can reach the user instantly.
3. Versatile: Mobiles can access basic facilities such as banking alerts and
social media, as well as entertainment such as audio, radio, and videos.
4. Multimedia: Mobiles can create audio messages and videos and capture
images.
5. Easy to use: Most phones are user-friendly and simple to use. However,
most new users find it challenging to use new devices as they offer a range of features.
1.2.2 AR, VR, AI and Other Formats
During the COVID pandemic, upticks were observed in the usage of mobile phones as many schools and colleges shifted 'online'. You are familiar with online learning. Mobile phones are a great medium to access online resources such as journals, books, videos, and textbooks. Enhancements such as Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) help students access simulations like never before. In simple language, VR is like entering a virtual zone or a game. If you need to understand what a Tsunami feels like, you can watch videos, but if you want to really 'feel' what a person being hit by a Tsunami feels like, you can use VR. VR will make you feel that you are 'in' that place as opposed to feeling like you are watching it from the outside. VR is a great way to understand what an expedition to the Antarctic will look like and has a lot of applications in education. Augmented reality is a tool that can be used to add new layers to your actual environment. You must have used apps to see how a painting or decoration will look in your room. It would help if you point your phone camera anywhere in your room, and the software will show you what the wall would look like with that painting. You can also enhance your pictures using filters before posting them on social media. The original image remains there but has been enhanced using AR technology. 5G technology will enable these on smartphones. While these are great uses of technology, other developing technologies, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), can also be dangerous. AI attempts to make machines think like humans and accomplish basic tasks by learning from their experience rather than computer programs. You may have seen some science fiction movies like Robot or RaOne. Voice search on your phone, personalised display recommendations on YouTube according to your search history, and navigation alerts on Google Maps are all based on AI data analysis. However, some negative actors can use AI for voice cloning. This is done using software that analyses your voice by hacking into your cellphone or 13

Mobile And Society using videos you share online and replicating the voice. The contacts in your phone book may receive calls from your duplicate voice, and they might be tricked into believing that you are in danger and need money. They could steal your identity and make fake claims using deep fakes or doctored images. It is important to understand the advantages and disadvantages of mobiles so that they can be used safely and effectively. Activity 1: List five features or apps you use most frequently from your mobile phone. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the characteristics of a mobile phone?

2. What do you understand about AR, VR, and AI?

1.3 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
MOBILE COMMUNICATION
Mobile phones are everywhere. They bring with them an unparalleled ease of use and familiarity. We can quickly upload any information instantly in a minute, and it can go worldwide within a few minutes. Even though it is a blessing, it has a negative side. We get thousands of messages every day. Misinformation and disinformation abound on social media platforms that are now immediately accessible to the wider public. While misinformation is wrong information shared by mistake, disinformation is a malicious piece of information shared to harm the player's reputation. You must have received a media message on social media messaging apps that later turned out to be fake or propaganda against some groups or individuals. These messages could be an honest mistake or an intentional attack on someone's reputation. Sometimes, satire is mistaken for news. Many jokes, parody pieces and memes are believed to be true. Just as we lock our belongings while travelling, we should also lock our personal information such as date of birth, Aadhar number, bank account details, and sensitive personal pictures while using the internet. We have all heard about unsuspecting individuals scammed by telecallers claiming to be bank officials or clicking links without verifying them. We have also seen people get trapped by malicious individuals who hack phones, steal

identities or blackmail individuals once they possess intimate details from Mobile As A Medium someone's life. This happens because of low media literacy levels. Media literacy is the ability to distinguish between fake and real information and make sense of media messages we see daily. These messages could be a fraud SMS, a scam email, a fake social media profile, or a suspicious website. Developing capabilities to handle the information we see daily is very important. The following table sums up the advantages and disadvantages of mobile phones.
Advantages Disadvantages
1 Portable: mobile phones Privacy Concerns: There are
provide a quick and easy way concerns about privacy and data of communicating with family, security, as phones can be hacked or friends, and colleagues and can infected with viruses. People could be carried everywhere. click pictures or shoot videos without consent.
2 Instant/Immediate Immediate: Messages sent using a
mobile device will reach the other end immediately, and there is a very limited option to remove the content shared. Our mistakes could cause loss of reputation, harm to others, and embarrassment for ourselves.
3 Versatile: Mobile phones serve Misinformation: Susceptible to
multiple purposes. They can misuse and misinformation be used as a camera, a GPS, a calendar, a music player, and more
4 Multimedia capabilities: They Technical challenges: New users
offer internet access, providing may face technical issues in using infinite information at your advanced devices as they increase in fingertips and integrate AR, VR complexity
and AI
5 Easy to use A lot of help is available online to
resolve technical issues, troubleshoot, etc., using a mobile device. However, the ease of use depends on the user's and the device's technical capabilities.
6 Emergency Services: In Distraction: They can be a
emergencies, mobile phones can major distraction due to constant be used to call for help. notifications, calls, and messages. There are both advantages and disadvantages to any technology. Prolonged use of mobiles can lead to health problems such as vision issues, hearing loss, and even mental health issues like anxiety and depression. Overuse could also lead to addiction. It is important to use mobile phones responsibly and be aware of

Mobile And Society these potential drawbacks while enjoying their benefits. One should develop media and digital literacy to engage and use the technology to its best. We need to be aware of the dangers and our legal rights. Activity 2: Give an example of misinformation that you have seen on your phone. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) What are the advantages and disadvantages of a mobile phone?

2) What is media literacy, and what are the consequences of having low media
literacy skills?

1.4 RIGHTS, LAWS AND DANGERS
We have rights as consumers and creators of content in India. While creating content on our phones and uploading it on social media or sharing it on chat apps, we are responsible for respecting copyrights and ensuring that the content is not hurtful to individuals and communities. As per the Punjab and Haryana High Court, incitement to violence on social media is equivalent to collecting men for waging war against the Government of India, as per section 122 of the Indian Penal Code. Similarly, clicking pictures of prohibited areas such as defence zones or restricted areas can incur a charge of trespassing and endangering the country's national security. Obscene and visually sensitive images can attract penalties and prison charges. We should be careful when storing and sharing information and mindful of what we capture on our cell phones. Any statement, act, video, or speech that could affect public tranquillity by creating fear among communities and individuals based on caste, religion, or language could lead to punishment under section 153A. Sharing video messages that you receive on your social media account could lead to jail terms. We must be extremely careful about our phone's technical settings, as most apps access our contact book, pictures, and even banking details on our cell phones. Connecting with public internet networks such as Wi-Fi at airports and bus stations can also affect the security of our devices if we are not careful.

As a content creator, mobiles facilitate citizens to report on issues important to Mobile As A Medium them and raise their voices on social media. These citizen reporters are now a formidable force, and journalists now depend on these reporters to get updates from war zones, hard-to-reach communities, and disaster zones. Mobile devices empower individuals to document events and voice their opinions on social media platforms. These citizen journalists have become powerful, providing real-time updates from conflict areas, remote communities, and disaster-stricken regions. Journalists increasingly rely on these citizen reporters for firsthand information. Numerous mobile applications and built-in features enable users to edit and instantly upload photos and videos, making mobile phones indispensable for modern-day storytelling and news reporting. This democratisation of news reporting has transformed the landscape of journalism, making it more inclusive and diverse. This service has enabled thousands to become social media influencers and share their stories. We had 50 thousand content creators with a followership between 10 to 50 thousand followers and more than 22 thousand creators that had under 10000 followers in the year 2023 .
1.4.1 Dangers in the Mobile World
Social media also brings a lot of dangers. Strangers can contact you and drop comments on your social media pages. Trolls (people leaving negative comments on your page) can affect your social image and mental well-being. Some of these dangers have been listed above. Targeted smear campaigns designed to spoil your reputation can be created using the pictures or personal information that you share on the internet. Hacking is also a real threat. Negative actors could hack into your mobile device and obtain information about your movements or bank details. While these are mistakes on the part of others, we could also cause inadvertent errors while using mobile phones. Sharing unverified information you received over social media that leads to fear, alarm, or unrest invites punishment of up to three years or a fine under section 505. Similarly, if it is determined that you have violated religious feelings by deliberately posting material that insults religious beliefs, you could be penalised with a three-year prison term or a fine under Section 295A. There are also other legal offences under the law, such as Defamation (Section
499) and criminal intimidation (Section 503). If you are a victim of any of these
offences, you can report them to the nearest cyber police station or the platform. Most platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, have mechanisms to remove offensive content and report fake profiles. Viral trends and videos have also resulted in safety concerns for some users. Clicking selfies or shooting videos at busy intersections and dangerous terrain can have untoward consequences. We should avoid becoming a part of such viral trends unless it is safe and healthy. We should be careful about uploading our information and pictures on random sites. Cyberbullying and online harassment are significant issues in today's digital age. Bullying that happens on social media or via mobile phones is aimed at scaring, angering and shaming individuals. It could take any form, such as online abuse, posting embarrassing pictures or videos or threatening people through messages. A severe form of

Mobile And Society online abuse could lead to online harassment. Most cyberbullies do not realise that they can be tracked easily by the police and platforms such as Facebook, etc. Such malpractices often cause a lot of anxiety and difficulty for those affected, but it is easy to seek help and get the culprits arrested.
1.4.2 Mobile Gaming and Addiction
Mobile gaming is another dimension of mobile phones that has not been discussed much. Mobile gaming and videos have become a huge segment of the mobile industry. There are around 480 million active online gamers in India, which is expected to generate revenue of USD 100 billion by the end of 2023. We also have 500 million people aged between 15-35 . This growth is attributed to increasing smartphone penetration, low rates of internet access and better devices .This has set India up to be one of the fastest-growing gaming markets in the world. There is an increase in professional gaming events and e-sports, as well as enhanced connectivity and advanced devices. Gaming and social media have created some negative effects together. Cell phone addiction is becoming an increasing problem. Cell phone addiction is defined as the inability of the affected person to give up using their phone. Doctors believe that people addicted to mobile phones behave similarly to people addicted to gambling. They cannot control their behaviour and feel compelled to use their phones. Feeling uneasiness and withdrawal when they are not able to use their phones creates physical issues such as irritability and anxiety. And much like gamblers, mobile phone addicts are unable to let go. They need to follow a strict 'de-addiction' regime under medical supervision. Low attention spans and physical symptoms due to smartphone addiction are dangerous but avoidable problems. There are some things we can do to prevent this situation from occurring. Removing time-consuming apps, such as games, social media, etc., from the phone can be helpful. Another useful technique is to eliminate notifications by changing your device settings. Some apps help monitor and reduce the time you spend on the device. Developing hobbies that do not involve using social media and mobile devices is important.
1.4.3 Do's and don'ts of Mobile Communication (etiquette
and safety) We can follow some good practices while using mobile phones and connecting to the internet to safeguard ourselves.
1. Always use a password for your mobile device.
2. Keep your social media profiles locked, and avoid putting intimate personal
information such as pictures or other identifiers on social media.
3. Avoid downloading unrated and potentially malicious apps. Only authorised
apps should be downloaded from the Play Store, according to your device's configuration.
4. Refrain from clicking any links from unknown senders in emails or mobile
messages.

5. Never share personal information such as ATM card PIN details and Mobile As A Medium
banking passwords with strangers, even if they claim to be bank officials.
6. Do not share any information or forward social media messages without
verification unless you know the message's authenticity.
7. Ensure you do not post offensive or hurtful content that could incite
violence or hurt religious sentiments.
8. It is useful to seek consent from people when you are recording them or
their voices and images.
9. If your mobile device is stolen or hacked, ensure you can delete the data
remotely.
10. If you receive messages from fake social media profiles or unknown
individuals, please block their accounts and inform the platforms about these suspicious accounts.
11. Frequently change passwords and never keep identical passwords for all
your accounts.
12. When switching from one device to another, always clean your data
completely from the previous device.
13. Ensure you use copyright-free content, such as music or pictures, when
creating content online. Copyright violations often result in legal hassles, and platforms tend to shut down posts and channels that are found to violate copyright.
14. When connecting with public Wi-Fi networks, always use an anti-virus that
can help prevent malicious codes from being dropped onto your phones.
15. Be extremely cautious when conducting online money transfers.
Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Give some examples of laws that keep us safe online.

2. Who is a citizen reporter?

3. What good practices can we follow to keep ourselves safe online?

1.5 NEWS AND MOBILE JOURNALISM
Today, the ease of use of mobile phones has made it a popular choice even in mainstream newsrooms. Gone are the days when journalists carried heavy equipment, recorded videos and edited them back in the studio. Today, journalists can record, edit and broadcast videos instantly using high-quality mobile phones. This stream of journalism, unsurprisingly called 'mobile journalism', is gaining popularity as many reporters have now started to use mobile devices to record videos and interviews, click pictures, or even do podcasts. This has many advantages; * Portable As mobile phones are easy to carry, journalists can now record videos from almost anywhere. There is no need for special equipment maintenance or additional crew such as cameramen. * Easier to use compared to cameras The phone's user-friendly nature makes it easier for a beginner to use. Anyone with a mobile phone can learn visual storytelling with ease. * Discreet Imagine you need to cover a story in a sensitive area, such as a war zone. The mobile phone can help you do your job quietly without bringing much attention to you. This type of reporting is especially useful if you are an investigative reporter and plan to interview sources quietly. * Social-first Whatever you record can be aired almost instantly. This brings immense power and responsibility because you can broadcast live from sensitive zones, and people can instantly receive your broadcast. This is useful in disaster zones and conflict-prone areas when you want to attract immediate attention to the situation. * Facilitates new formats of broadcasting The mobile phone allows you to instantly post a photo story, a simple video with basic editing, a voice dispatch or a 'podcast', and a graphic or a text report. It also allows you to update your story in real time. These changes allow you to choose more effective techniques for storytelling. * Cost-effective While a newspaper subscription involves some cost, most news websites are free. It is easy to access news and information and refer to multiple sites. * Participatory Mobile journalism allows citizens to participate in reporting by helping them contribute visuals--pictures, videos, and audio regarding matters of concern. This helps expose corrupt individuals and practices. Reporters can get support for their stories from common citizens if they cannot reach the place in time or 20 if the place they want to cover is inaccessible.

* Accessible Mobile As A Medium Anyone with a phone connecting to the internet can receive information instantaneously. It could be a fisherman out at sea looking for weather updates or a farmer trying to decide which crops to sow. You can access information even if you don't have a television connection or a newspaper subscription. Even senior citizens and persons with disabilities can access the internet and obtain desired information through enhanced settings such as text-to-speech and enlarging the font size on their devices. Another good point is the customizability. The mobile device you use captures your choices and preferences throughout the day. This helps news organisations to give you personalised news. If you only like sports and entertainment, setting up your news app to show you those news pieces is possible. Thus, mobile journalists are not just faster but also creative and understand the medium well. They can bring attention to topics and issues that still need to be addressed by news channels and newspapers. A mobile journalist could use numerous storytelling methods, such as AR, VR, interviews, podcasts, video stories, or picture essays. Mobiles offer flexibility and agility to deliver the news quickly and in an accessible manner. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are some advantages of mobile phones concerning news and
journalism?

2. What are the qualities needed in a mobile journalist?

1.6 LET US SUM UP
Mobile phones are ubiquitous, especially in India, with 1.10 billion mobile connections, representing 77% of the population. A significant majority of these users access the internet on their mobile devices. Mobile phones are easy to use and familiar, allowing instant information upload and dissemination. However, this ease of use also leads to the spread of misinformation and disinformation on social media platforms. The convenience of mobile phones has made them a popular tool in newsrooms, giving rise to 'mobile journalism'. Journalists can now instantly record, edit,

Mobile And Society and broadcast videos using high-quality mobile phones. This new form of journalism is gaining popularity, allowing for faster news delivery, creative storytelling, and coverage of underreported topics and issues. Mobile journalists can use various storytelling methods such as AR, VR, interviews, podcasts, video stories, or picture essays. Thus, mobile phones offer flexibility and agility in delivering news quickly and accessible. However, there are many dangers that we are exposed to when we go online. Voice cloning using AI-based tools, identity theft using malicious apps, and trolling through anonymous accounts are all too common in the mobile world. We need to be alert while spending time online. Everyone has the right to feel safe and respected online.
1.7 KEYWORDS
KBPS & MBPS: Kbps stands for kilobits per second (1000 bits per second) and measures data transfer speed. Mbps (megabits per second) and Gbps (gigabits per second) are commonly used today. GPS: GPS stands for Global Positioning System. It's a satellite-based radio navigation system that provides geolocation and time information. PIN: Personal Identification Number: In banking or security, a PIN is a unique code used to verify the user's identity and secure financial transactions when using a credit or debit card. MMS and SMS: MMS stands for Multimedia Messaging Service.MMS extends the core SMS (Short Message Service) capability, allowing the exchange of text messages greater than 160 characters in length. Unlike text-only SMS, MMS can deliver a variety of media, including up to forty seconds of video, one image, a slideshow of multiple images, or audio. The most common use involves sending photographs from camera-equipped handsets.
1.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Campbell, S. W. (2013). Mobile media and communication: A new field, or
just a new journal?. Mobile Media & Communication, 1(1), 8-13. https:// journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/2050157912459495
2. Frith, J., & Ozkul, D. (2019). Mobile media beyond mobile phones. Mobile
Media & Communication, 7(3), 293-302. https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/ cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1067&context=english_pubs
3. Green, N., & Haddon, L. (2009). Mobile communications: An introduction
to new media. Berg.
4. Jensen, K. B. (2022). Media convergence: The three degrees of network,
mass, and interpersonal communication. Routledge.
5. Ling, R., & Donner, J. (2013). Mobile communication. John Wiley & Sons.
6. Oksman, V. (2010). The mobile phone-A medium in itself. VTT. https://
trepo.tuni.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/66612/P737.pdf?sequence=1

7. Stald, G. (2008). Mobile identity: Youth, identity, and mobile communication Mobile As A Medium
media. MacArthur Foundation Digital Media and Learning Initiative. https://mediaimpact.issuelab.org/resources/865/865.pdf
8. Wei, R. (2013). Mobile media: Coming of age with a big splash. Mobile
media & communication, 1(1), 50-56. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/ pdf/10.1177/2050157912459494
1.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Characteristics of a mobile phone encompass portability, communication
capabilities through calls, texts, and internet access, diverse functionalities like camera, apps, and multimedia playback, compact size for easy handling, and battery-powered mobility. Additionally, modern smartphones integrate features such as GPS, sensors for various purposes, touchscreen interfaces, and connectivity options like Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. These devices serve as multifunctional tools facilitating not only communication but also entertainment, productivity, and access to information.
2. Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), and Artificial Intelligence
(AI) represent advanced technologies shaping contemporary digital experiences. AR overlays digital content onto the real world, enhancing perception, while VR immerses users in simulated environments. AI involves machines performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as learning, problem-solving, and decision-making, often through algorithms and data analysis. These technologies revolutionise sectors like gaming, healthcare, education, and entertainment, offering innovative ways to interact with digital content and augment human capabilities. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Mobile phones offer unparalleled connectivity, enabling instant
communication, access to information, and enhanced productivity. They serve as multifunctional tools for work, education, and entertainment. However, their constant connectivity can lead to addiction, distraction, and reduced face-to-face interaction. Privacy concerns arise due to data breaches and surveillance. Excessive screen time may impact mental health, causing anxiety and sleep disturbances. Additionally, the digital divide exacerbates inequalities, as not everyone can afford or access mobile technology.
2. Media literacy refers to the ability to critically analyse, evaluate, and create
media messages. Low media literacy skills can result in susceptibility to misinformation, manipulation, and propaganda. Individuals may struggle to discern credible sources from unreliable ones, leading to distorted perceptions and uninformed decision-making. This can perpetuate societal divisions and hinder democratic discourse. Furthermore, lack of media literacy may contribute to the spread of false narratives and reinforce stereotypes. Developing media literacy empowers individuals to navigate the complex media landscape responsibly, fostering informed citizenship and safeguarding against manipulation.

Mobile And Society Check Your Progress: 3
1. Advantages of mobile phones in news and journalism include instant
reporting capabilities, enabling journalists to cover breaking news in real- time. Mobile phones offer multimedia functionalities, allowing for the capture of photos, videos, and audio recordings, enhancing storytelling. They facilitate direct engagement with audiences through social media platforms, fostering interactive journalism. Additionally, mobile phones are portable and ubiquitous, enabling journalists to work from anywhere, enhancing flexibility.
2. Qualities needed in a mobile journalist include adaptability to technological
advancements, proficiency in mobile reporting tools and apps, and strong storytelling skills to effectively convey news through multimedia formats. Mobile journalists should possess excellent communication abilities to engage with diverse audiences and navigate rapidly changing news landscapes. They should demonstrate creativity in utilising mobile technology to produce compelling and informative content. Moreover, a mobile journalist must exhibit resilience and quick decision-making skills to address challenges encountered in the field.

UNIT 2 MOBILE NATIONS
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 Overview of Mobile Connectivity
2.2.1 Global Mobile Scenario
2.3 What does Access Mean and Why it is Important
2.4 Advantages of High Mobile Penetration
2.5 Advantages of Being 'Mobile First'
2.6 Challenges and Solutions
2.7 Future Possibilities
2.8 Let Us Sum Up
2.9 Keywords
2.10 Further Readings
2.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
2.0 INTRODUCTION
You must be familiar with the smartphone. Smartphones are devices that provide internet access to users through mobile networks. We can use smartphones and tablets to connect to the Internet on the go. You can use it to access any information you like. Be it online gaming, watching videos, surfing the Internet, using social media, or finding locations using the navigation service. The mobile phone allows people to easily access banking, news, and information. Users can access entertainment apps and learn new things from the comfort of their homes or even while travelling. Mobile connectivity refers to the ability of devices to connect to the Internet and communicate with each other, mainly via cellular networks. The effects of mobile connectivity are pervasive and transcendental. It is used everywhere in healthcare, education, or space technology. The result is a society that can quickly progress by leveraging these benefits. For example, students can learn a foreign language, find translation jobs, and earn supplemental income using the correct apps. A farmer can use AI to predict which crops to grow and choose when to harvest using a mobile app. However, it is important to brace ourselves fully to deal with the challenges of this new environment by making ourselves digitally literate.
2.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to :

Mobile And Society * Understand the overview of mobile connectivity in the country and the world; * Examine the global trends and their implications as a user of mobile phones; * Perceive the benefits and disadvantages of being a mobile-first population; and * Protect yourself from online harms and dangers of the mobile world.
2.2 OVERVIEW OF MOBILE CONNECTIVITY
2.2.1 Global Mobile Scenario
As per the report 'State of Mobile Internet Connectivity 2023', the share of the global population living in areas without mobile broadband coverage stood at 5% by the end of 2022. The report states that almost 400 million people are still not covered by a mobile broadband network. Of the 3.4 billion people who remain unconnected to mobile Internet, nearly 90% (3 billion) live in an area already covered by mobile broadband but do not use mobile Internet services. With mobile internet adoption outpacing network expansion, this usage gap has been shrinking slowly, from 40% in 2021 to 38% in 2022. However, the usage gap remains almost eight times the size of the coverage gap. (p 13, THE STATE OF MOBILE INTERNET CONNECTIVITY 2023). At the beginning of 2023, India had about 692 million internet users, with a penetration rate of 48.7%. The penetration rate is calculated as a ratio between the total population and the number of SIM cards per country. It is estimated that 730 million people (over 51% of the population) were offline at the beginning of 2023. China is home to the most internet users (1.09 billion), 76.4 per cent of China's total population. Just 52.4 per cent of the population in India is connected to the Internet. We still have over 680 million offline in 2024 compared to China's 336 million. These numbers are also true for the world's highest number of smartphone users, with China boasting a staggering 974.69 million subscribers and India with around 659 million smartphone users. The penetration rate is the highest for Macao at 413%, while North Korea has the lowest internet penetration with a staggering zero per cent rate. Globally, we had nearly 8.9 billion mobile phone subscriptions in 2023, suggesting that 80 per cent of the world population now has a smartphone. Even though connectivity improved in 2021 due to the pandemic, only 31% of South Asian people were using mobile Internet on their phones by the end of 2022, while around 69% of people in Africa use mobile Internet. Globally, more than 60% of internet traffic comes from mobile phones. Mobile phones surpassed laptops and computers as preferred mediums for internet access for the first time in 2017. After that, we have seen a persistent rise in mobile-led traffic on the Internet. Today, around 61% of all global traffic on the Internet comes from mobile phones. Mobile adoption figures also vary region-wise. While it stands at 82% in North
26 America and 79% in Europe, the figure is much lower at 64% for Sub-Saharan

Africa (as of 2021). East Asia and the Pacific have the third highest levels Mobile Nations: of connectivity (with 71% of the region's population using mobile Internet) Access and Reach after North America and Europe & Central Asia. In the Pacific Islands, mobile internet adoption is much lower at 27%. There is a gap between people owning smartphones and accessing the Internet. In simple terms, not all people with internet-enabled phones use mobile Internet. This could be due to the high cost of internet access or poor connectivity. The Mobile Connectivity Index (MCI) ranks 170 countries against the four key enablers of mobile internet adoption: infrastructure, affordability, consumer readiness, and content and services on a scale of 1-100. While the infrastructure head indicates mobile network coverage, affordability means cheaply available Internet, and consumer readiness measures people's digital ability to use the Internet. Content relevance implies the ability of the population to access online content for informed decision-making. There could be several reasons for low internet penetration in countries: * Infrastructure: The Internet is difficult for hard-to-reach communities, such as those in Islands, hilly areas, and remote regions. * High cost of access or Affordability: Indian consumers have seen a drop in data prices, increasing mobile adoption. However, low internet speeds and high cost of phone devices can be an inhibiting factor when it comes to affordability. * Gender and other limiting factors: Women and other disadvantaged groups find it difficult to have the same opportunities to access the Internet. This is a global phenomenon and not restricted to less developed countries alone. * Media and digital literacy: As you know, the Internet can only show information you search for. If your search capabilities are restricted due to language or other barriers, you may not be able to locate the content you are looking for. This could drive people away from the Internet. * Regulations around access: If the government blocks internet access, it is difficult for people to remain online. Similarly, governments could block some websites from time to time, which may make it difficult for people to access critical information. India ranks 61.5 on the Mobile Connectivity Index, indicating that information is widely available and that the infrastructure for accessing the Internet has significantly improved. Mobile video and gaming are also on the rise due to rising connectivity in the country. We had 467 million YouTube users, while Facebook had 315.6 million in 2023. The average time spent online stands at six hours 23 minutes, while time spent using the Internet on mobile phones is three hours 55 minutes. While
26.7% use mobile for accessing banking services, 32.8% use mobile payment
gateways such as UPI, PayTM, etc. Youth use the Internet to watch videos, connect with peers, gain news and information, and study. India is expected to have 900 million mobile internet users by 2025. Activity 1 List the app you use most frequently and state what you use it for.

Mobile And Society Check Your Progress: 1
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Which country has the most significant number of internet users?

2. What is the Mobile Connectivity Index?

3. What factors affect internet penetration?

2.3 WHAT DOES ACCESS MEAN AND WHY IT
IS IMPORTANT
Access means the ability of the individual to connect to the Internet using their mobile device. Access is crucial for several reasons:
1. The mobile phone enables many services. It is easy to access health-
related content and use it for educational purposes, banks, etc.
2. The main use of mobiles is to facilitate connectivity among people.
Depending on the network and device type, connecting with friends and family is possible over video and voice. This allows citizens to work remotely, stay abreast of developments, and access courses online.
3. Laptops and computers are costly. A basic laptop costs around Rs 10,000,
while a basic internet-enabled Android phone starts as low as Rs 3000. This allows a large section of the population to access the Internet. These people can get a vast amount of information as India has one of the lowest rates for data access in the world at Rs 7.5/GB. This is much cheaper than the United States, which costs up to $8 (Rs 668/GB).
4. In many places, access to the Internet is restricted for certain sections
of the population due to traditional norms. For example, women are not allowed to access services because it may mean they have to travel far from home to access them if the mobile network is better. Mobile Internet allows this section to access the Internet from their homes, making information available to all.

5. Pandemics such as COVID-19 have taught us that whenever movement is Mobile Nations:
restricted, it becomes easy for us to remain connected when we use mobile Access and Reach Internet. Children could access online classes, health services could be made available online via telemedicine, and information about vaccination was made available through the COWIN app. Other than these, access to mobile Internet is important for administrative and logistical purposes. In India, access to daily wages is often tied to the authentication of the Unique Identification Number you have registered using your mobile phone. This Aadhar number is your social identity for all matters related to citizenship and governance. You need to quote the Aadhar number to avail yourself of daily wages, direct benefit schemes, and health schemes offered by the government.
2.4 ADVANTAGES OF HIGH MOBILE
PENETRATION
It has several advantages:
1. We have a large user base in India that still needs to be connected to the
Internet. When everyone can come online, we will have over 600 million people who need to come online to avail themselves of the above benefits. It is estimated that a 10% increase in mobile penetration can increase Total Factor Productivity in the long run by 4.2 percentage points.
2. Businesses can benefit from enhanced connectivity by delivering products
and services to those unconnected by retail outlets. This will help 'off- grid' communities to receive a wide variety of products. Imagine a supermarket shelf with several options for shampoos instead of whatever your neighbourhood shop sells. It empowers the consumer to have more choices and the ability to decide based on cost and preference instead of relying on local shopkeepers to make these choices on their behalf.
3. Mobile Internet also promotes inclusivity by allowing customers to place
orders with local businesses through WhatsApp. Mobile-based payments enable people to purchase groceries, transfer money and buy medicines, eliminating the need to carry cash. It allows persons with disabilities to use voice-based tools and other accessibility options to communicate with the outside world and get groceries delivered to their doorstep without stepping out of their homes.
4. Using mobile phones has enhanced the digital and technological capabilities
of users. However, low levels of digital literacy also make us vulnerable to cyber-attacks and scams. This is a hindrance to greater adoption of mobile phones. Mobile banking, while generally safe and convenient, does come with certain risks. We have seen in the previous unit that open or public WiFi spots can be a source of danger while using mobiles. We should avoid using such open spots when accessing banking or confidential websites on our phones. Clicking unauthorised links can lead to ransomware being planted on your device. Fake apps or phishing apps (apps that look like they are from your bank but are from fake actors and mean to steal your data) are also a real threat online. The 29

Mobile And Society most significant danger is losing your mobile device. Since your device carries confidential information, losing it can create many problems. It is advisable to use a remote locking feature to delete and lock your data remotely to keep us safe. Another way to keep oneself safe is to regularly update the apps and software on the phone and install anti-virus software. In the previous unit, we learned that we should not download suspicious apps, share our online banking passwords or confidential information with anyone over the phone, or click any link received over SMS or WhatsApp, as these could lead to scams. Other benefits of mobile services in India In India, mobile devices play a crucial role in Aadhaar authentication. As per the new Telecommunication Bill of 2023 provisions, biometric authentication will become mandatory to purchase SIM cards. This is supposed to strike down fraudulent activities and enhance security. However, there have been some concerns around data protection and surveillance due to the widespread use of Aadhar and mobile-based authentication. If we lose our credit card, we can block it and get a new one issues. However, if we lose our biometric data due to a data breach, anyone accessing it could misuse it. They could use our data to plant evidence, such as fingerprints. Since we cannot access the biometric data we create, it is impossible to know if such a record has been replaced with inauthentic or fraudulent data. For example, a daily wager may have his fingerprint data replaced with that of his supervisor, who can now claim his wages as he has access to them due to the biometric fraud. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1. What do you mean by access? Why is it important?

2. What are the advantages of high mobile penetration?

2.5 ADVANTAGES OF BEING 'MOBILE FIRST'
Globally, the mobile and telecom industry is poised for growth on the back of the 5G network. As we have studied previously, 5G can enable many mobile phone services, leading to efficiency and enhancements in our lives. Of these, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the most important. AI can help in the following 30 ways:

* AI uses our phone settings and search history to analyse the information we Mobile Nations: type and predict our search. It also offers predictive text suggestions that Access and Reach save us time and effort. For example, AI auto completes the text when we type 'good' on our phone by suggesting that we follow it up with 'morning' or 'evening', depending on the time of day. * In the previous unit, we learned about Generative AI and its uses. The new content we can create with this feature has many applications in every field. Mobile devices can be used in telemedicine in several ways: * Patients in far-flung areas can use mobile devices to consult with doctors in real time. Imagine you are camping out in a forest with your friends, and one of them is suddenly injured. You can quickly check possible options for first aid using the mobile phone and even consult a doctor in another part of the world for quick relief. You can send pictures or videos of the injury, and the doctor or health care practitioner could also provide video/ image guides on handling the injury over the mobile phone. * Telemedicine apps allow doctors to monitor patients remotely. Data such as oxygen and blood pressure levels are collected through apps and relayed to medical professionals, who can make decisions based on this information. It is even possible to perform surgeries using robotic instruments remotely. * The medical apps can help you keep track of diagnostic schedules, appointments and prescriptions. * Online consultations with specialists are beneficial for women who are sometimes unable to access doctors because of their inability to travel to far-off locations and cultural hindrances in seeking treatment for intimate illnesses. Telemedicine is also useful in supporting long-term care for patients who are bedridden due to illness or injury. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1) What are the advantages of being mobile first?

2) How can mobiles be used for telemedicine?

2.6 CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS
Even with all the significant advancements in satellite connectivity, remote areas need more infrastructure, such as mobile towers, to connect and fully leverage mobile connectivity's benefits. Remote and rural regions often need more robust mobile network infrastructure. The costs of spectrum and installing and managing mobile networks can be prohibitive. For telecom operators to continue offering their services, the average revenue per user may need to be higher. Confusion around policies and environmental considerations can affect telecom companies' operational challenges. There are areas of overlapping connectivity, whereas some areas have coverage gaps, meaning they do not receive mobile signals from any provider. It is challenging to encourage the adoption of mobile phones among people who have yet to be introduced to them. It translates into additional costs, and the benefits do not seem exciting enough for them to use the device. Many people also believe that radiation from cell phones can cause fertility issues and health problems, leading to non-adoption. Lack of awareness about the benefits of mobile Internet and digital literacy hinders adoption. Mobile operators, government and mobile device manufacturers need to work together to develop a strategy that fosters last-mile connectivity and allows consumers a wide range of technological options. More awareness of the benefits of mobile connectivity is required. The users must also be made digitally literate to handle the deluge of messages they are exposed to once they come online. Robust mechanisms are needed to protect people and redress their grievances when they face scams and other mobile-based crimes. Better advocacy is required around data protection and surveillance fears. Transparency in data practices is needed at every step. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. What are the challenges that hinder the adoption of mobile connectivity?

2. What are the solutions that can enhance the adoption of mobile connectivity?

Mobile Nations:
2.7 FUTURE POSSIBILITIES
Access and Reach
As of present data, there is hope that the adoption of mobile phones with the Internet will continue to grow. Coverage and usage gaps are expected to narrow. The digital economy is expected to drive the real economy. However, fake videos, images, and texts often found on social media are a cause of concern. These messages can lead to violence. Digital and media literacy that helps individuals tap into the information universe is paramount. The widespread availability of 5G will enable a new era in the Internet's story. The world of the Internet of Things (IoT), which will allow you to connect your phone to your microwave and cook a meal from thousands of miles away, is a reality waiting for us to unravel.
2.8 LET US SUM UP
Mobile connectivity has become an important part of our lives. They are everywhere. Their portability and ability to perform a range of things, from calculations to clicking pictures to accessing social media, have made them highly relevant to today's connected world. Smartphones have enabled people to work seamlessly regardless of their location. The online services enabled by the mobile device allow users to connect effortlessly. They can also use AR, VR and AI simulations to communicate their ideas better with friends and colleagues. You are familiar with the food delivery apps that help you order your favourite food. Similarly, there are apps for anything you want to do on the Internet. You can access world cinema, documentaries and even news from other parts of the world. Gaming is a big source of entertainment for youth. However, there is also a darker side to the web. There can be numerous scams, cybercrimes and difficulties you may face online. It is very important to be aware of these and take preventive steps such as using secure passwords, not clicking on random links and never downloading apps from unauthorised app stores. Another interesting use of mobile phones is accessing news and information. This has enabled citizen reporters and witnesses to live-stream or record instances of abuse or major developments as they unfold. In many cases, their narratives differ greatly from those of mainstream media. This helps people seek accountability and enhance transparency in governance. The mobile phone also allows us to send and receive information immediately. In conclusion, mobile connectivity has transformed how we live, work, and interact with the world. It has opened new opportunities for communication, information access, and digital services and will continue to play a crucial role in shaping our future.
2.9 KEYWORDS
* Coverage Gap: Those who live in an area not covered by a mobile broadband network.

Mobile And Society * Usage gap: Those who live within the footprint of a mobile broadband network but do not use mobile internet services. * Internet of Things (IoT): The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to a network of physical devices, vehicles, appliances, and other physical objects embedded with sensors, software, and network connectivity, allowing them to collect and share data. IoT devices--also known as "smart objects"--can range from simple "smart home" devices like smart thermostats to wearables like smartwatches and RFID-enabled clothing to complex industrial machinery and transportation systems. Technologists even envision "smart cities" predicated on IoT technologies. * Telemedicine is a term that covers the use of technology to deliver clinical care at a distance. It ensures that a person receives healthcare when needed, especially for those with limited access to care. (Telemedicine: Definition, uses, benefits, and more (medicalnewstoday.com) * Generative AI: Generative artificial intelligence (AI) is a type of AI that generates images, text, videos, and other media in response to inputted prompts. * Total factor productivity: It measures productive efficiency by measuring how much output can be produced from certain inputs.
2.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Coursera. (n.d.). What Is Generative AI? Definition, Applications, and
Impact. Retrieved from https://www.coursera.org/articles/what-is- generative-ai
2. Exploding Topics. (n.d.). Mobile Internet Traffic. Retrieved from https://
explodingtopics.com/blog/mobile-internet-traffic
3. Firstpost. (n.d.). India has the third cheapest mobile data in the world:
People in US pay 33x more than Indians. Retrieved from https://www. firstpost.com/world/india-has-the-third-cheapest-mobile-data-in-the- world-people-is-us-pay-33x-more-than-indians-12614602.html
4. GSMA. (2023). The-State-of-Mobile-Internet-Connectivity-
Report-2023 [PDF]. Retrieved from https://www.gsma.com/r/wp- content/uploads/2023/10/The-State-of-Mobile-Internet-Connectivity- Report-2023.pdf
5. GSMA. (2023). 2023 - GSMA Mobile Connectivity Index. Retrieved
from https://www.mobileconnectivityindex.com/index.html
6. The Economic Times. (n.d.). India internet users: India to have 900
million active internet users by 2025, says report. Retrieved from https:// www.indiatimes.com/
7. Visual Capitalist. (n.d.). What Does 1GB of Mobile Data Cost in Every
Country? Retrieved from https://www.visualcapitalist.com/cost-of- 34 mobile-data-worldwide/

2.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. China has the most significant number of internet users, with over 1 billion
internet users as of recent estimates.
2. The Mobile Connectivity Index is a tool developed by GSMA to measure
the performance of countries in enabling mobile internet connectivity. It considers four key enablers: infrastructure, affordability, consumer readiness, and content and services.
3. Factors affecting internet penetration include infrastructure availability,
affordability of services and devices, digital literacy, government policies and regulations, socio-economic factors, and cultural attitudes towards technology. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Access refers to the ability to obtain or make use of something, in this context,
it often pertains to the availability and utilization of digital technologies and the internet. Access is important because it allows individuals to participate fully in the digital world, benefiting from information, communication, services, and opportunities for education, employment, and civic engagement. Ensuring broad and equitable access helps bridge digital divides, promotes social inclusion, and fosters economic growth and innovation.
2. High mobile penetration offers numerous advantages, significantly
enhancing connectivity by ensuring widespread communication capabilities, enabling people to stay connected with family, friends, and colleagues. This connectivity facilitates economic opportunities, allowing individuals to engage in economic activities such as mobile banking, e-commerce, and remote work, which in turn contribute to economic growth. Additionally, high mobile penetration provides easy access to a wealth of information and services, including educational resources, health information, and government services. This accessibility promotes social inclusion by bridging social gaps and providing marginalized communities with vital digital services and information. Moreover, the prevalence of mobile technology spurs innovation and the development of new technologies and applications, driving technological advancement and improving overall quality of life. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Adopting a mobile-first approach offers several significant advantages.
Firstly, it ensures wider reach and accessibility, as it allows content and services to be readily available to a larger audience, particularly in regions where mobile devices are the primary means of internet access. This approach also prioritizes an improved user experience by designing for smaller screens first, which results in a more intuitive and seamless interaction for users, thereby enhancing engagement. Moreover, mobile- 35

first designs typically lead to enhanced performance, as websites and applications optimized for mobile devices tend to load faster and function more efficiently, accommodating the limitations of lower bandwidth and processing power commonly associated with mobile usage.
2. Mobile devices have revolutionized the field of telemedicine by enabling
remote consultations, where patients can use video calls and chat features to consult with healthcare professionals from the comfort of their homes. This capability is particularly beneficial for individuals in remote or underserved areas who might otherwise have limited access to medical services. Additionally, mobile health applications and connected devices facilitate continuous health monitoring by tracking and transmitting vital health data, such as heart rate, glucose levels, and physical activity, directly to healthcare providers. This continuous monitoring allows for timely medical interventions and better management of chronic conditions. Furthermore, mobile apps provide patients with easy access to their medical records, educational resources, and reminders for medications and appointments, thus improving patient engagement, adherence to treatment plans, and overall health outcomes. Check Your Progress: 4
1. One of the primary challenges hindering the adoption of mobile connectivity
is economic barriers. The high costs associated with mobile devices and data plans can be prohibitive for low-income populations, making it difficult for them to access and maintain mobile connectivity. Additionally, infrastructure limitations pose a significant obstacle. In many rural and remote areas, inadequate telecommunications infrastructure leads to poor network coverage and unreliable service, which discourages the use of mobile technology. Furthermore, a lack of digital literacy also impedes the adoption of mobile connectivity. Many individuals lack the necessary digital skills and awareness to effectively use mobile technology, thereby reducing their ability to benefit from its advantages.
2. To enhance the adoption of mobile connectivity, several solutions can be
implemented. Subsidies and affordable pricing are crucial in making mobile devices and data plans more accessible to low-income users. By reducing the financial burden, more people can afford to adopt and maintain mobile connectivity. Additionally, investing in the expansion and improvement of telecommunications infrastructure, particularly in underserved areas, is essential. Enhanced network coverage and reliable service will encourage greater use of mobile technology. Finally, digital literacy programs play a vital role in empowering individuals. Providing education and training to improve digital skills and awareness enables more people to utilize mobile technology effectively and participate fully in the digital economy.

UNIT 3 MOBILE AND NEWS MEDIA
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 Mobile Media
3.2.1 Characteristics of Mobile Media
3.2.2 Types of Mobile Media
3.2.3 Uses of Mobile Media
3.3 Mobile Media Production
3.3.1 Mobile News Gathering and Storytelling
3.3.2 Mobile News Editing and Distribution
3.3.3 Utilising Mobile Devices for Multimedia Storytelling
3.3.4 Ethical Consideration of Mobile Journalism
3.4 Future of Mobile News Media
3.4.1 Emerging Trends in Mobile News Media
3.4.2 The Impact of Mobile News Media on Society
3.5 Limitations and Concerns
3.6 Let Us Sum UP
3.7 Keywords
3.8 Further Readings
3.9 Check your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
The relationship between mobile and news media in India is incredibly strong. Smartphones are the dominant device for accessing news, which has changed how information is received and consumed. Today, 72% of Indians access news through smartphones, compared to just 35% on computers. This makes India a "mobile-first" market in terms of news consumption. News aggregators and apps like Google News, Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint are highly popular for their convenience and curated content. A 2022 report from the Pew Research Center's Project for Excellence in Journalism and the Economist Group, "The Future of Mobile News," suggests that as many as 43% say the news they get on their tablets adds to their overall news consumption. And almost a third, 31%, said they get news from news sources on their tablet. This mobile-first approach has increased news consumption overall, making news more accessible and immediate. Scannable news formats like short

Mobile And Society articles, videos, and infographics have become popular, catering to shorter attention spans. Greater emphasis on local and regional news reflects the ease of access to geographically specific information.
3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Gain an in-depth understanding of the mobile-first news media landscape
in India;
* Analyse the impact of mobile technology on news consumption patterns and preferences; * Develop effective communication skills to engage with news content on mobile platforms; * We are developing critical thinking skills to differentiate between credible news sources and misinformation; and * Utilise mobile technology to share news and information responsibly.
3.2 MOBILE MEDIA
Mobile media refers to the production of different media content for smartphones and its consumption on smartphones and tablets. Media content can be divided into different types:
1. News and Information: Mobile media has become the primary way
of consuming news and informative content. In a Reuter Institute of Communication report, 72% of Indians consumed news and information through their smartphones, whereas only 35% of users consumed content on computers and laptops. This shift has led to changes in how content is produced and consumed. The following are the key trends in mobile media content: i. Short content: Recent trends suggest that people are more interested in consuming short content. Therefore, content producers focus on producing short articles, videos, and infographics. The popularity of YouTube shorts and Facebook reels strongly supports this trend. ii. Personalised Content: When we consume content on smartphones, we generally do it through news apps. These apps provide us with content and collect our watch history, search history, and interests. Based on this history, news producers create an algorithm to provide us with personalised content. iii. Live Streaming: As news content is consumed on smartphones, news organisations also include new ways to give users a better experience. To provide breaking news, producers need not wait for visuals and images. Instead, they go for live streaming on their platform. Now, users can experience real-time feeds through live streaming. iv. Local News: This is another area where mobile media is concentrated. One of the important elements that defines news is proximity. People 38 want to know about events and incidents that are taking place nearby.

With mobile becoming one of the prominent tools for consuming Mobile and News Media news, content creators are creating apps focusing on local news only. Today, many apps provide content about a particular city or town. v. Fact-Checking: This is one of the growing areas of news production. Mobile has filled the gap between news producers and consumers. Consumers also produce content through pictures, write-ups, and videos. Many platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, depend significantly on user-generated content. But when everybody is a content creator, there is always a problem of fake content circulated among users. To know whether the provided content is fake or authentic now, news organisations are creating platforms providing fact-checking.
2. Entertainment: Mobile media and entertainment have become deeply
intertwined daily. With the ubiquitous presence of smartphones and tablets, we can access many entertainment options at our fingertips. India boasts a vibrant and growing entertainment industry and mobile media is crucial in distributing and consuming entertainment news. 72% of Indians consume entertainment news through smartphones, highlighting the dominance of mobile media. News aggregators like Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint are extremely popular, offering curated content and short formats. Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter are major entertainment news sources, with dedicated accounts and trending hashtags. Local and regional news apps cater to India's diverse linguistic and cultural landscape. Popular entertainment content on mobile i. Celebrity gossip and Bollywood news are major draws, with dedicated channels, websites, and apps focusing on stars and their activities. ii. Movie reviews, trailers, and release updates are widely available, driving movie-going habits. iii. Music streaming platforms like Spotify and Gaana integrate news and interviews with music streaming, creating a comprehensive entertainment experience. iv. Short-form video platforms like TikTok and Instagram Reels offer bite-sized entertainment news and trends. The convergence of entertainment news and mobile media in India presents a dynamic and evolving landscape. By understanding the trends and challenges, news organisations and content creators can engage with the audience effectively and contribute to a thriving entertainment ecosystem.
3. Educational Content: Mobile media has transformed the field of education.
Educational content delivered through mobile devices is now a powerful tool for teaching and learning, offering numerous benefits for educators and students. i. Increased Accessibility: Mobile devices provide access to educational resources anytime and anywhere. It has broken the barriers of time and distance. Students can learn at their own pace and convenience.

Mobile And Society Offline access to content helps the learner to access the content without internet connectivity. ii. Enhanced Engagement: Mobile-friendly content formats like interactive videos, quizzes, and games make learning more engaging and enjoyable. AR (Augmented Reality)and VR (Virtual Reality) technology can create immersive learning experiences that bring abstract concepts to life. Social learning platforms facilitate collaboration and interaction among students and teachers. iii. Personalised Learning: Mobile apps and platforms can adapt to students' needs and learning styles. Adaptive learning algorithms provide customised recommendations and learning pathways. Students can track their progress and receive immediate feedback, allowing for self-reflection and improvement. iv. Accessibility for Diverse Learners: Mobile technology can provide educational resources for students with disabilities, such as text-to- speech tools and audiobooks. Content can be translated into different languages, making education accessible to a broader audience.
4. Creativity and Expression: Mobile media has become an important tool
for creative expression, empowering individuals to share their creative ideas. Smartphones and tablets offer a powerful platform for this purpose by providing access to creative tools. Mobile media empowers anyone to become a creator, regardless of background or resources. Barriers to entry are lowered, allowing diverse voices and perspectives to be heard and celebrated. i. Ease of accessing tools: Mobile devices offer instant access to creative tools, allowing individuals to capture their creative ideas anytime and anywhere instantly. Portability will enable users to create content anywhere. There is no requirement for traditional studios and workstations. All tools for creative production are available on mobile devices. There are several apps and software available to do a variety of creative work, which include:
- Photo and video editing: Adobe Photoshop Mobile, KineMaster
- Music creation and production: GarageBand, FL Studio Mobile
- Drawing and painting: Procreate, Adobe Illustrator Draw
- Writing and storytelling: Ulysses, Wattpad
- Coding and programming: Mimo, SoloLearn
ii. Social media as creative tools: Social media platforms allow for immediate sharing of creative work with a global audience, facilitating feedback, collaboration, and community building. Take the example of platform X (formerly Twitter), where you have to write your ideas crisply, as there is a word limit in putting forward your thoughts. By using your creativity, you can produce good content. Live streaming platforms offer real-time interaction and engagement with an audience, fostering new forms of creative performance and expression.

iii. AR (Augmented Reality) and VR (Virtual Reality): These Mobile and News Media technologies offer immersive experiences that can be used to create interactive storytelling, visualisations, and virtual worlds. iv. Creativity and expression: Capturing photos and videos, editing content, and sharing creative work through social media platforms.
3.2.1 Characteristics of Mobile Media
The evolution of mobile media can be traced back to the early 2000s when media companies generally converged around using SMS texting and MMS multimedia to communicate and push news updates. In 2007, with the advent of the iPhone, the focus began changing to building native mobile apps for various types of phones and their operating systems. Mobile media has several characteristics that distinguish it from other forms of media. According to a 2019 paper titled "Mobile Media and Communication: A Review and Research Agenda," published in the journal Mobile Media & Communication, mobile media is characterised by the following features:
1. Ubiquity: Mobile media is always a click away. We always keep our
mobile phones with us, so this form of media has a ubiquitous presence. It enables us to access information, entertainment, and communication channels.
2. Personalisation: This is also a key characteristic of mobile media. As
we know, all the apps and websites we access record our watch history and searches. Based on that, they deliver personalised content to the users.
3. Interactivity: Mobile devices facilitate two-way communication and
engagement, allowing users to comment, share, and actively participate in content creation.
4. Real-time: Mobile media provides access to updates and information
as they happen, fostering a sense of immediacy and connection.
5. Short content: Attention spans tend to be shorter on mobile devices,
driving the creation and consumption of short-form content like videos, infographics, and bite-sized articles.
6. Location-based services: Mobile devices can utilise GPS and other
location-based technologies to offer relevant services and information based on the user's location.
7. Social integration: Mobile platforms enable seamless integration
with social media networks, facilitating sharing, discussion, and community building around content.
8. Multimodality: Mobile media incorporates text, images, audio, and
video, creating a more immersive and engaging experience. Overall, these characteristics shape the unique landscape of mobile media and its impact on our lives. Understanding these characteristics is crucial for navigating this complex environment and maximising its communication, creativity, and learning potential. 41

Mobile And Society 3.2.2 Types of Mobile Media
Mobile news can be presented in several formats, each with advantages and disadvantages. Here are some of the most common formats:
1. Text Articles: This is the most used news format for mobile. It should be
simple and easy to read. Mobile text articles provide a concise overview of the news story. Mobile platforms should be created in a manner suitable for quick updates. Mobile users want to get updated and breaking news instantly. One of the disadvantages of this format is that text-based articles are limited in conveying complex information and need more visual appeal than other formats.
2. Image-Based News: Image-based news can be a series of images or a single
image with important information. This kind of content is eye-catching and engaging. It conveys information quickly and efficiently. However, it might need more depth and details to suit all news stories. This kind of content is usually light and gives general details of an event.
3. Video News: Video news is a multimedia presentation of news that
involves presenting news through video footage, audio, and written content in one package. This kind of content is highly engaging and informative. A resourceful source can produce it, and news organisations with all the resources can generate this kind of content. Consumption of this kind of content requires high-speed internet, which is one of the limitations of this type of content.
4. Audio News/Podcasting: This is one of the fastest-growing mobile news
types. People can listen to podcasts while doing other work, like driving or doing other work. This type of news is convenient for people interested in quality and in-depth analytical news. Podcasting requires focused users, who have to focus intently to understand properly. This type of content is not suitable for all environments.
5. Live Streaming: Live streaming provides real-time updates. It is done by
live streaming an event with live commentary. It allows users to witness events as they unfold. Live streaming has brought mobile media ahead of TV news because now mobile media can also provide breaking news like TV through live streaming with the added feature of interactive news format, where comments and inputs can be added by users themselves.
6. Social Media Content: There are many social media platforms, and all the
platforms have different formats for content sharing. For example, if you are sharing content on Facebook, then you have no word limit, whereas if you want to share something on X (formerly Twitter), you have to share it crisply, as there is a word limit of 240 characters. Similarly, if you share video content on Facebook, it has to be in landscape mode, whereas if you share content on Instagram, you have to shoot it in portrait mode. You should also have a portrait-mode video for Facebook reels and YouTube shorts. Facebook reels and YouTube shorts also require different kinds of content generation skills, where you have to be very concise and crisp and able to share the central idea of the content in a short video of 1 minute or less than 1 minute. Social media content fosters discussion and engagement,

but at the same time, this medium is prone to misinformation and biased Mobile and News Media content. It would help to be very careful about the news source.
3.2.3 Uses of Mobile Media
Mobile media has become an essential part of our lives, transforming how we consume information, stay connected, and entertain ourselves. Its uses are vast and ever-evolving, but here are some of the most prominent uses of mobile media, especially for communication and information purposes:
1. Communication: The first important use of mobile media is
communication. Mobile media has made communication easy and instant. Before the advent of Web 2.0, users used to send messages through mobile messaging features. Still, after Web 2.0 emerged, various mobile apps like WhatsApp, Messenger, and Telegram were used to send and receive messages and multimedia content. These apps have enabled people to use instant messaging, voice calls, and video conferencing on the go.
2. Social Interaction: One of the important roles of media is to provide a
space where people may discuss their issues and, through discussions, find their answers. This kind of space is popularly called the "Public Sphere", the idea that Jurgen Habermas gave. In this way, social media has provided an "online public sphere" to the people. Platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter allow us to share updates, connect with communities, and stay informed about current events, fostering a sense of belonging and social interaction.
3. Information and News: Mobile media has made producing and consuming
information and news very easy. Now, you can have various information per your choice a click away. Several apps from news organisations and aggregators provide instant access to breaking news, articles, and multimedia content, keeping us informed about local and global events. There are also various apps to support content creation and production.
4. Podcasts: Podcasts or audio content are provided to listeners interested
in analytical and in-depth information on an issue. Podcasts are made on various topics, from news and current affairs to personal development and entertainment.
5. Educational content: Mobile media has made learning convenient.
Through mobile media, students can access millions of online lectures and tutorials on various subjects. Various educational institutions have also developed apps to provide content through mobile media. It has made knowledge accessible anytime, anywhere. Mobile reading apps like Kindle and Audible offer access to millions of e-books and audiobooks, providing convenient and portable ways to enjoy literature and storytelling.
6. Entertainment: The Media's role is to entertain. Mobile media has not
only made it accessible easily but also provided new experiences to users. Various streaming services like Netflix, Disney+, and YouTube offer vast libraries of movies, TV shows, music, and other video content, providing endless entertainment options for all ages.

Mobile And Society 7. Work and Time Management: Mobile media has provided various tools to help us manage our work and time. Calendar apps help us manage appointments, deadlines, and tasks, keeping our schedules on track. Apps like Google Meet, Zoom, Microsoft Teams, etc., allow you to conduct online meetings. These apps have helped us manage work and time efficiently. Various financial management tools help us track our spending, manage finances, and make informed financial decisions.
8. Health and Wellness: Mobile media has also provided several apps to
manage our health. Some apps track our steps, workouts, and sleep patterns, motivating us to stay active and healthy. Meditation apps offer guided meditations, breathing exercises, and mindfulness techniques to reduce stress and promote psychological well-being. There are healthcare apps that provide convenient access to medical advice and consultations, improving healthcare accessibility and convenience. These are just a few examples of how mobile media has integrated various aspects of our lives. As technology continues to evolve, the possibilities for mobile media are endless, constantly shaping how we communicate, learn, play, and experience the world around us. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss some key trends in mobile media content.

2. Explain how mobile media has transformed the field of education.

3.3 MOBILE MEDIA PRODUCTION
Mobile Media Production is an exciting field that surrounds the world. It includes various forms of media creation and production. It involves the development, planning and execution of visual and audio content for different platforms. These platforms include film, television, YouTube, and other digital media. Creative media production offers many opportunities for those passionate about the media industry, whether producing a film, creating graphic designs or composing engaging audio content. Mobile is the most accessible device for storytelling. Therefore, mobile production is diverse. The most fascinating part of mobile production is that anybody can create it. Scholars have identified three elements of mobile storytelling: * Compelling characters

* An Exciting and convincing story world Mobile and News Media * A strong storyline with clearly defined plot points These elements are important for mobile stories. These elements can be used to create emotion and engagement for creating mobile stories.
3.3.1 Mobile News Gathering and Storytelling
Mobile news gathering refers to using mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets to collect and report news stories. It allows journalists to be more flexible and responsive. Mobile devices are also more portable and easier to use than traditional news-gathering equipment, allowing journalists to capture footage and interviews in real-time. Journalists use several types of mobile news-gathering techniques to report news stories. Some of these techniques include:
1. Mobile Reporting: This is the most basic form of mobile news-gathering.
Reporters use their smartphones to capture video, audio, and photos of events. Journalists can use various tools to enhance the quality of production. For example, news-gathering apps like FiLMiC Pro, LumaFusion, and Mavis3 provide advanced features such as manual focus, exposure control, and audio monitoring, allowing journalists to capture high-quality footage and audio using their mobile devices. Now, journalists are also using their mobile phones for live reporting. Several times, they have given Piece to Camera using their smartphones.
2. Live Streaming: Journalists use this feature to broadcast events in real-time.
By using this feature, journalists provide immediate content, and it also enhances audience interaction. Platforms like Facebook Live, Instagram Live, and YouTube Live enable journalists to broadcast events in real time. This feature is useful for journalists covering protests, press conferences or live events, where quick updates are vital. A strong internet connection is required to use this feature effectively; otherwise, live streaming will not be smooth, negatively affecting audience engagement. Journalists must take care of this technical requirement.
3. Social Media Reporting: Social media reporting involves using social
media platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram to report news stories. This technique uses social media to share news updates, photos, and videos of news events. Journalists can also use vast amounts of user-generated content on social media platforms to gather information. However, journalists must be cautious when using user-generated content because several manipulated and morphed user-generated content is available on social media. Before using that content, journalists must verify the content from various sources. It requires critical thinking and fact-checking to ensure accuracy and avoid misinformation. Social media reporting is beneficial in providing diverse voices on an issue.
4. Drone Journalism: Drone journalism means using mobile app-guided
drones for news-gathering purposes. Drone photos and videos provide a unique aerial perspective to news coverage. Using drones allows

Mobile And Society journalists to be more innovative and insightful in their reports. The use of aerial videography is not new in journalism. In 1958, KTLA, a US- based news channel, modified a single-engine helicopter to get aerial views for news coverage. Soon, other media houses followed. However, there were some limitations to using helicopters for news gathering. First, only big media houses could afford it; second, it was not appropriate to cover disasters as it would be risky for the news person to shoot from a helicopter. Technological advancement brought drones, which are affordable to anybody. So many freelancers and individuals give different perspectives to a news item, which news organisations can efficiently use through social media aggregation. Before using the drone, one has to get proper training. They must understand safety protocols and adhere to the local regulations. Drone reporting is ideal for covering environmental issues and disasters and showcasing large-scale events.
5. Citizen Journalism: In the era of new media technologies, it is popularly
said that "Every citizen is a journalist". Ordinary citizens equipped with smartphones can become valuable sources of information, capturing events in their communities and bringing them to the attention of news organisations. There are instances where citizen journalists acted as valuable sources of crucial information, which turned into breaking news for mainstream media. For example, the raid on Osama Bin Laden was first reported by a Twitter user; later on, it became sensational news all over the world. Information shared by common citizens can offer valuable insights and perspectives that traditional media overlooks. However, verifying and vetting citizen-generated content is crucial to maintaining journalistic integrity by using information shared by common citizens.
3.3.2 Mobile News Editing and Distribution
Mobile news editing and distribution require a delicate balance between speed, accuracy, and engagement. By adopting these strategies and staying informed about the evolving landscape of mobile news platforms and audience preferences, journalists can effectively transform their reporting into impactful stories that reach the right people at the right time, right on their mobile devices.
1. Speed: One of the key features of mobile media is immediacy. Mobile
users seek information as early as possible. If you miss that, you will lose your users. This means that when you get raw material distributed among users, you have to edit quickly to deliver content as soon as possible.
2. Accuracy: You not only have to maintain speed, but at the same time, you
have to be very accurate. Because under the pressure of providing content as soon as possible, there is always a chance of misinformation or fake information. Traditional media has reporters; therefore, they can recheck the information from their sources before publishing or broadcasting. Mobile media hugely depends on the feed users provide, so the accuracy issue becomes very important. For accuracy, new media content producers should always try to get at least one authentic source, whether individual or traditional.
3. Engagement: One of the key features of new media is interactivity. Content
46 should be engaging and interactive. It should motivate users to comment

and share it further. If your content is not engaging, it will become stale Mobile and News Media very early. Online content creators should always look for ways to make the content more engaging by adding various features and facilities.
3.3.2.1. Mobile Editing Strategies
The final stages of mobile news creation, editing, and distribution are as crucial as news gathering. As we know, mobile users want instant information. Hence, journalists must quickly transform the raw material into engaging stories and deliver them to the right audience through the most effective channels. The key aspects of mobile editing are the following:
1. Conciseness: Mobile users want short content they can consume in micro
time while waiting for the metro or bus. This is why social media platforms like Facebook and YouTube have created reels and shorts, respectively. Therefore, while editing, the focus should be on delivering the core message within seconds. Mobile media editors should aim for brevity and clarity.
2. Visual Storytelling: Mobile editors should always provide a visual story.
This means prioritising visuals like short clips, powerful images, and infographics while editing. Visuals should be arranged to tell the whole story by themselves. Don't hesitate to use visual enhancement tools and apps to improve visual impact.
3. Clear voice-over: In mobile media, impactful audio matters. Always try
to get voice-over artists with clear and impactful voices. Use a voice-over to narrate the contextual thing; subtitles can do what is needed for footage. Don't overwhelm the story with voice-over.
4. Elements of engagement: One important role of mobile media editors
is engaging content. Therefore, various platforms like polls, quizzes, discussion boards, and other interactive elements should be integrated into the story. Integration with all social media platforms is also important.
3.3.2.2. Distribution of Mobile Media
Mobile media can be distributed in several ways. You can have your platform or use various available platforms for news sharing. These are the following:
1. News Apps: You can use your news app to publish your stories. Otherwise,
you can partner with established news app platforms to reach a wider audience. Many mobile media creators have apps to popularise and monetise later if they get more users. In India, this trend is to create localised news apps, which are expanding faster. Media students may follow this trend and must try to establish such apps.
2. Social Media: Social Media is another destination for mobile content.
Many users are not professionals who want to run their apps. Many users are not regular content creators, but they create it occasionally when they find such an opportunity. These types of users use social media to share their content. They use the power of platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram to amplify the reach of their content and engage with the audience directly. Here, they can also earn money if their content becomes popular. But they have to share their earnings on social media platforms. Platforms grab a large share of earnings. 47

Mobile And Society 3. Push Notifications: This is another way to grab users' attention. Many media organisations and news apps utilise push notifications to alert followers about breaking news or highlight important updates from their stories. This is done to grab users' attention and engage them with the stories.
4. Live Streaming is also a very useful way to share content with users
immediately. It has enabled mobile media creators to share breaking news or real-time updates of an event. This feature of mobile media has challenged the monopoly of TV news channels over live footage of an event and increased audience participation.
5. Targeted Messaging is a way to deliver personalised content to users. It
involves collecting data on users' content consumption patterns and sharing relevant content with them, which is a kind of audience segmentation based on their consumption patterns.
6. Video Sharing Platforms: Many users create documentaries, docudramas,
or films for mobile users. These creators use video-sharing platforms like YouTube, Vimeo, PeerTube, etc. These platforms catalogue the content under various categories. YouTube has extensive cataloguing and over 2 billion users. These video-sharing platforms also share the earnings with the content creators. Content creators should also consider other factors when distributing content. First, optimise your content for efficient data consumption. This will make your content accessible to users with limited data plans. Second, fact-checking is also important. As mobile media creators heavily depend on the information users share, they must be very careful about whether shared facts are correct or manipulated. This will increase your authenticity and credibility as a content creator.
3.3.3 Utilising Mobile Devices for Multimedia Storytelling
For mobile media content creation, the mobile device is a tool that can do almost all the tasks. Mobile devices are equipped with many apps which can perform many things to create content. These compact powerhouses boast features and apps that can take your storytelling to new heights. You can utilise mobile devices to do the following things:
1. Picture and Audio/Video: You can use your mobile phone's camera to
capture photographs and record video. One of the advantages of this device is that it is handy, and you do not need to carry a heavy bag to do this task. Your mobile phones are equipped with a high-quality camera through which you can capture high-quality visuals. Try to explore various modes while taking pictures or shooting videos. Experiment with various light conditions and see which is best suited for the occasion. Try to use different angles to create a visual story. Apart from this, your mobile camera has various creative features; show your creativity using those features. Your mobile is also equipped with a microphone to record clear audio using your device. You can also add an external mic to your phone to take interviews, give voice-overs to the visual story, and record ambient sound. Consider binaural

mics for a 3D audio experience. While capturing pictures and videos, you can Mobile and News Media gather additional data using your mobile phone. You can add GPS location to the video or picture, enhancing your story's authenticity. You can also easily gather weather conditions of any place in the world from your mobile set. It is very helpful while doing environment journalism and sports journalism.
2. Mobile Editing: One of the most important elements of production is post-
production. Mobile makes post-production easy. Various powerful editing apps enable you to edit your footage very easily. Apps like KineMaster and iMovie let you seamlessly edit your footage. With these apps, you can add music and sound effects to your footage. You can also give voice-over on the app itself. You can add text and graphics to your footage. You need to train yourself before using all the apps' options. Once ready, you can produce content that is not less than desktop editing. Editing photographs is also very easy. All mobile phones have built-in cropping and collage functions. Apart from that, many photo editing apps may enhance the quality of photo editing. Microsoft provides a mobile version of Word, Excel, PowerPoint, etc., for editing text or other data. On your mobile phone, you can easily edit all the textual information. Try to use Word's audio typing feature; you can write a long write-up very quickly. Don't bother if some word is not written correctly; complete audio typing, and then you can edit the copy manually.
3. Value Addition: To enhance the experience of mobile content consumers,
you can add value to your existing story in various ways. One such thing is exploring augmented reality (AR) storytelling. AR apps like Layar or Blippar can add a virtual element to your physical environment, allowing users to interact with the content differently. Another value addition you can make is adding interactive elements to your existing story. Use apps like Poll Everywhere to integrate interactive elements like polls and quizzes to boost audience engagement.
4. Disseminating/Sharing: Mobile phones have all the social media apps. You
can share your finished work on any platform which suits you according to your content format and style. All these platforms also have different user bases. For example, Snapchat is used mostly by the younger generation, whereas users of all categories use Facebook. Likewise, Instagram is more popular among the younger generation. You can also choose these platforms based on your content format and style. For example, if you have created your work in portrait format, then Snapchat, Instagram, and Facebook reels are more suitable. You can use the Facebook wall feed if your content is in landscape mode. Some dedicated storytelling platforms, like Spryto or Krock, are designed for mobile storytelling. These platforms have several features, such as interactive elements, narratives of various types, and targeted distribution options. Live streaming through Facebook Live and YouTube lets you showcase real- time storytelling. This feature allows you to cover live events, conduct live interviews, and show behind-the-scenes glimpses to your audience to give them a sense of connectedness and immediacy. 49

Mobile And Society 3.3.4 Ethical Consideration of Mobile Journalism
Mobile journalism poses various ethical considerations for journalists. According to Stephen Chernow (2016), mobile journalism presents several ethical challenges, including the need for journalists to verify user-generated content, protect sources, and ensure that mobile journalism does not compromise the safety of journalists. Another study by Ahmed Deen & Po-Lin Pan (2022) suggests that using smartphones as journalistic tools raises several ethical concerns, including privacy, accuracy, and credibility. Let us discuss some key ethical considerations while doing mobile journalism:
1. Accuracy: In mobile journalism, accuracy is one of the ethical
considerations. As news gathering and dissemination is very easy from mobile, misinformation and unconfirmed reports have also been circulated on mobile platforms. Therefore, mobile journalists need to be very cautious while circulating the information. Verify the source of information and facts very rigorously. Always try to give your story a bigger context. It will help users get a greater picture, and it will lead to providing the right interpretation. Accuracy can be maintained by maintaining transparency. Be transparent about your source and potential limitations of your reporting.
2. Privacy: The right to privacy is a very important ethical consideration for
journalists. Mobile journalists tend to record everything during any crucial event without considering others' right to privacy. As journalists, we should always respect individuals' privacy. There is also a misconception that we need not get permission from the individuals we record publicly. Filming somebody in public places without obtaining consent is also a violation of the right to privacy. So, if you are filming somebody, always get permission before doing that. If you are covering sensitive issues, always blur the faces of individuals, particularly in sensitive situations. Avoid compromising anyone's safety or security. Journalists' safety is also important. Journalists should always assess potential risks before covering an issue. Journalists should respect local customs and traditions while covering a story in a different cultural setting. They should not try to misrepresent the facts without understanding their traditions.
3. Credibility: This comes with objectivity and following an unbiased
approach. To do this, journalists should bring wholeness to the story. This means giving space to all stakeholders. It would help if you did not cherry- pick the facts. Give importance to all sides of the story and present diverse perspectives. In doing so, avoid giving your personal opinions or biases. You might have your opinion, but this should not be reflected in your writing. If you make any assumptions, challenge those assumptions and be critical of your biases.
4. Social Responsibility: Journalism is all about empowering common citizens
and making powerful accountable. Act responsibly as a journalist. Always try to promote responsible discourse. Encourage positive and constructive discourse created around your stories. Journalists' responsibility does not

end simply by posting the story; they must act as moderators in online Mobile and News Media communities and actively address misinformation and hate speech. Mobile journalists should always try to give a voice to underrepresented communities. Traditional media has gatekeeping at several levels, and there is a lack of space and slots. However, for mobile journalists, this is not the case; they have ample space to advocate for positive change in society. By addressing these ethical considerations, mobile journalists can report responsibly, accurately, and sensitively. Remember, your stories have the potential to inform, educate, and even inspire positive change. Use your platform wisely and contribute to a more informed and ethical media landscape.
3.4 FUTURE OF MOBILE NEWS MEDIA
The field of Mobile media-based journalism is constantly expanding, and it is expected that it will continue to grow in the future. Mobile has been made to create content and share it with the users. It is also expected that constantly changing audience preferences and rapidly evolving new media technology have the potential to tap new audiences and provide a more immersive experience for readers and viewers.
3.4.1 Emerging Trends in Mobile News Media
Constantly changing mobile technologies and user preferences support new content types to give users new experiences. Let us discuss some emerging trends in mobile news media:
1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Virtual Reality (VR): AR and VR-based
stories promote immersive storytelling, allowing users to experience news events firsthand. AR and VR-based news could redefine news consumption and audience interactivity with the content. These kinds of content are particularly important for complex and remote stories for which real footage is unavailable. AI-powered news generation can also provide personalised news summaries or produce original news articles. While ethical concerns like accuracy and bias remain, they can give opportunities for the production of tailored content. AI-powered algorithms can also be used to personalise news feeds. Now, AI can tailor the content according to individuals' interests. However, this raises concerns about filter bubbles and echo chambers, but at the same time, it provides opportunities for promoting diversity of viewpoints.
2. Interactive and Participatory content: A new trend in mobile media
content is more user interactivity and participation in content generation. There has been a rise in interactivity-based content, where users contribute to content creation through polls, quizzes, and discussions. Content creators run quizzes and discussions on specific topics to increase interactivity. There are various app-based platforms which enable journalists to do this very conveniently. Based on the inputs received from users, content is created. These contents give a sense of community and allow diverse perspectives on an issue.

Mobile And Society 3. Targeting niche community: Mobile users are very interested in knowing about the incidents and events of their immediate surroundings. This user preference has added a new trend in content generation for mobile users. Now, hyper-local news platforms are on the rise. These platforms provide news and events in users' immediate surroundings. This new trend has strengthened the growing demand for localised content. This has also strengthened the community connections. It is also supported by the increasing popularity of niche social media communities based on specific news topics or interests. Local area-based social media communities are also on the rise. Content creators are also targeting these niche communities for content generation.
3.4.2 The Impact of Mobile News Media on Society
Any new technology impacts society. Mobile technology brings all kinds of information to individuals at a click away, enabling individuals to access all kinds of information. Mobile has made individuals capable of creating content, too. This capability of users brought so much fake content to the platform. Mobile media has impacted society in both positive and negative ways. Let us discuss positive impacts first.
1. Access to information: Mobile news platforms have increased access to
information. Any information is just a click away regardless of individuals' location or socioeconomic background. Before mobile media, internet- based information was only available to individuals having broadband connections. Internet penetration was low, and due to this, there was a digital divide in the society. Mobile media has bridged the digital divide and empowered individuals.
2. Consumers became prosumers: Mobile technology has democratised
news production. Now, every individual can act like a watchdog of society. Mobile technology has enabled consumers to produce content and not only consume it. This has made consumers prosumers--consumers who also produce content. The rise of citizen journalism allows common citizens to share their perspectives on an issue. It has diversified narratives and challenged the monopoly of traditional media.
3. Engagement and Participation: Mobile news platforms encourage
greater engagement and user participation. Users can participate through comments, polls and discussions. Increased participation promotes the formation of an information society and active citizens.
4. Community building: Mobile media has promoted providing information
relevant to users' immediate surroundings. Mobile users are more interested in knowing things happening locally. Many hyper-local news platforms emerged to meet this demand, strengthening community connections. There are some negative impacts also:
1. Misinformation and disinformation: Social media algorithms and
echo chambers can facilitate the spreading of false information and

biased narratives, threatening informed decision-making and democratic Mobile and News Media processes.
2. Polarisation: Personalised news feeds can limit exposure to diverse
viewpoints and reinforce existing biases, potentially leading to societal polarisation and a decline in critical thinking.
3. Addiction: The fast-paced, bite-sized nature of mobile news can
contribute to shorter attention spans and addiction to constant information consumption, impacting mental well-being and productivity.
4. Unequal access: Despite increased access, digital literacy gaps and limited
internet connectivity can still exclude certain demographics from fully participating in the mobile news ecosystem.
5. Privacy concern: Data collection and targeted advertising practices
associated with mobile news platforms raise concerns about user privacy and potential manipulation. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
3. What are the characteristics of mobile media?

4. Discuss some formats of mobile media.

3.5 LIMITATIONS AND CONCERNS
Mobile media has transformed how we consume information, connect with others, and engage with the world. However, despite its undeniable benefits, limitations and concerns are associated with its pervasive use. Following are some key issues: Limitations:
1. Small screen size and limited resolution: Mobile technology constantly
improves but cannot beat the larger displays of computers and laptops. Mobile phones have a limited scope for showing visual details. Reading on a mobile screen is also very cumbersome, especially when reading complex documents.
2. Information overload: The constant stream of notifications and constant
information received on mobile phones affect users with information overload. Various researches also show that on mobile screens, users read

Mobile And Society less, contributing to shorter attention spans and difficulty focusing on longer-form content.
3. Digital divide: Everyone needs equal access to fast and reliable internet
connections. Users in tier 2 and 3 towns, especially villages, need help accessing content. This is related to a lack of internet infrastructure. For those with fast connections, there is another problem of the content- based digital divide. In a diverse country like India, where there are many languages and dialects, people don't get content in their languages, creating another kind of digital divide.
4. Privacy concerns: Mobile devices and apps collect vast amounts of user
data, raising concerns about privacy breaches and targeted advertising practices.
5. Health risks: Excessive use of mobile devices can lead to eye strain, neck
and back pain, and sleep disturbances due to blue light exposure. Concerns:
1. Misinformation and disinformation: The rapid spread of unverified
information and fake news on social media platforms can distort public understanding of important issues and have detrimental consequences.
2. Cyberbullying: Online anonymity can encourage people to engage in
cyberbullying and harassment, creating a hostile environment for users, particularly vulnerable groups like young people.
3. Addiction: Excessive mobile media use can lead to addiction, anxiety, and
social isolation, negatively impacting mental well-being and relationships.
4. Erosion of critical thinking: Reliance on quick snippets of information on
mobile platforms can hinder the development of critical thinking skills and the ability to focus on complex topics.
5. Impact on social interactions: Overdependence on mobile communication
can diminish face-to-face interactions and weaken social bonds, leading to feelings of loneliness and isolation. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
5. Mention the three elements of mobile storytelling.

6. What are the limitations of the use of mobile media?

Mobile and News Media
3.6 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we understood how mobile media news is becoming an important source of information for users. We also learned how mobile media content differs from other media forms. We also discussed how new technologies are providing great new experiences to users. Now, users have also become news producers. Deciding what is fake and real becomes very difficult in an avalanche of information. Therefore, ethical considerations are very important for mobile platforms. Mobile media can be a powerful tool for good, but acknowledging its limitations and addressing the associated concerns is crucial for responsible and healthy use. By striking a balance and using technology thoughtfully, we can maximise the benefits of mobile media while minimising its negative impact on our lives and society. Remember, responsible usage and awareness of limitations are key to leveraging the positive aspects of mobile media while mitigating its potential pitfalls. Let's strive to create a healthy and balanced relationship with mobile technology, maximising its benefits for ourselves and others.
3.7 KEYWORDS
Cyberbullying: Use of technology to harass, threaten, embarrass or target another person Public Sphere: Arena where citizens come together, exchange opinions regarding public affairs and form public opinions Ubiquity: Property of being everywhere Augmented Reality: Interactive experience that enhances the real world with computer-generated information
3.8 FURTHER READINGS
Mobile-First Journalism: Producing News for Social and Interactive Media,
Steve Hill, Paul Bradshaw, Routledge
News for a Mobile-First Consumer, Paula M. Poindexter, Peter Lang Publishing Inc Mobile News: Journalism's Shift from Fixed to Fluid, Andrew Duffy, Rich
Ling, Nuri Kim, Edson Tandoc, Jr., Oscar Westlund, Routledge
MOJO: The Mobile Journalism Handbook: How to Make Broadcast Videos with an iPhone or iPad, Ivo Burum, Stephen Quinn, Routledge News and Democratic Citizens in the Mobile Era, Johanna Dunaway, Kathleen Searles, et al., Kalorama; Unabridged edition
3.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The following are the key trends in mobile media content: 55

Mobile And Society * Short content: Recent trends suggest that people are more interested in consuming short content. Therefore, content producers focus on producing short articles, videos, and infographics. The popularity of YouTube shorts and Facebook reels strongly supports this trend. * Personalised Content: When we consume content on smartphones, generally, we do it through news apps. These apps provide us with content and collect our watch history, search history, and interests. Based on this history, news producers create an algorithm to provide us with personalised content. * Live Streaming: As news content is consumed on smartphones, news organisations also include new ways to give users a better experience. To provide breaking news, producers need not wait for visuals and images; rather, they go for live streaming on their platform. Now, users can experience real-time feeds through live streaming. * Local News: This is another area where mobile media is concentrated. One of the important elements that defines news is proximity. People want to know about events and incidents that are taking place nearby. With mobile becoming a prominent tool for consuming news, content creators are creating apps focusing on local news only. Today, many apps provide content for a particular city or town. * Fact-Checking: This is one of the growing areas of news production. Mobile has filled the gap between news producers and consumers. Consumers also produce content through pictures, write-ups, and videos. Many platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, depend greatly on user-generated content. But when everybody is a content creator, there is always a problem of fake content circulated among users. To know whether the provided content is fake or authentic now, news organisations are creating platforms providing fact-checking.
2. Mobile media has transformed education by increasing accessibility,
enhancing engagement, providing personalised learning and better accessibility for diversified learning. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The following features characterise mobile media:
* Ubiquity: Mobile media is always a click away from us. We always keep our mobile phones with us, so this form of media has a ubiquitous presence. It enables us to access information, entertainment and communication channels. * Personalisation: This is also a key characteristic of mobile media. As we know, all the apps and websites we access record our watch history and searches. Based on that, they deliver personalised content to the users. * Interactivity: Mobile devices facilitate two-way communication and engagement, allowing users to comment, share, and actively participate in content creation.

* Real-time: Mobile media provides access to updates and information Mobile and News Media as they happen, fostering a sense of immediacy and connection. * Short content: Attention spans tend to be shorter on mobile devices, driving the creation and consumption of short-form content like videos, infographics, and bite-sized articles. * Location-based services: Mobile devices can utilise GPS and other location-based technologies to offer relevant services and information based on the user's location. * Social integration: Mobile platforms enable seamless integration with social media networks, facilitating sharing, discussion, and community building around content. * Multimodality: Mobile media incorporates text, images, audio, and video, creating a more immersive and engaging experience.
2. Some formats of mobile media are as follows:
i. Image-Based News: Image-based news can be a series of images or a single image with important information. This kind of content is eye-catching and engaging. It conveys information quickly and efficiently. However, it might need more depth and details to suit all news stories. This kind of content is usually light and gives general details of an event. ii. Video News: Video news is a multimedia presentation of news that involves presenting news through video footage, audio, and written content in one package. This kind of content is highly engaging and informative. A resourceful source can produce it, and news organisations with all the resources can generate this kind of content. Consumption of this kind of content requires high-speed internet, which is one of the limitations of this type of content. iii. Audio News/Podcasting: This is one of the fastest-growing mobile news types. People can listen to podcasts while doing other work, like driving or doing other work. This type of news is convenient for people interested in quality and in-depth analytical news. Podcasting requires focused users, who have to focus intently to understand properly. This type of content is not suitable for all environments. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The three elements identified for mobile storytelling are:
o Compelling characters o An Exciting and convincing story world o A strong storyline with clearly defined plot points
2. Some major limitations in the use of mobile media are small screen size and
limited resolution, information overload, digital divide, privacy concerns and health risks.

UNIT 4 BENEFITS OF MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Benefits of MoJo
4.2.1 For the Media Institutions
4.2.2 For the Newsrooms
4.2.3 For the News Professionals
4.2.4 For the News Users
4.2.5 For Prosumers
4.3 Platform Specific Benefits
4.3.1 For Photography
4.3.2 For Audio Bytes/Podcasts
4.3.3 For Video Bytes /Streaming
4.4 Let Us Sum Up
4.5 Keywords
4.6 Further Readings
4.7 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
In the changing world of journalism, MoJo has emerged as a game changer, revolutionising how news is captured, crafted and consumed. After reading this sentence, the first thing that must have crossed your mind is, what exactly is this Mojo? Mobile journalism, or Mojo, means journalism that uses mobile devices, like smartphones and tablets, to create, edit, and share news content. Learners, you will be surprised to know that nowadays, even the most professional journalists utilise these mobile technologies to gather and produce news stories quickly and efficiently, which not only enables real-time reporting but also helps in engaging with their audience. In this Unit, we will delve deeper into mobile journalism. It is a storytelling approach that empowers journalists to be versatile content creators on the move by exploring its advantages for the various stakeholders of journalism. While discussing mobile journalism, we will understand how MoJo liberates journalists from the constraints of traditional equipment and empowers them with the agility to report from any location with unprecedented immediacy. Through this Unit, we will examine MoJo's coveted potential in contemporary journalism by shedding light on its various benefits through the lens of mobile devices. From instantly capturing audio bytes to harnessing the storytelling

power of video clips, Mojo enables innovation, efficiency, and increased Benefits of Mobile audience engagement. Journalism
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Explain the concept of mobile journalism and its advantages; * Explain the benefits of mobile journalism for media institutions; * Mobile Journalism's advantages on newsroom and media professionals; * Discuss benefits of mobile journalism on news users and prosumers; * Explain platform-Specific Benefits of Mobile Journalism; and * Advantages of Mobile Journalism in the context of video bytes and audio bytes.
4.2 BENEFITS OF MOJO
Now, let us begin by learning the benefits of MoJo. Learners, if you take a closer look, the advantages of mobile journalism are very much apparent from its definition. In his book, "Mobile -First Journalism: Producing News for Social and Interactive Media", Hill & Bradshaw defined mobile journalism as "the practice of using portable electronic devices to produce news stories. This includes reporting, editing, and distributing news from the field without the need for traditional, bulkier equipment." Hence, mobile journalism has been characterised by its agility, immediacy, and the integration of multimedia elements in storytelling since its inception. Mobile journalism (MoJo) also presents a range of transformative benefits in news reporting. Its cost-effectiveness, leveraging ubiquitous smartphones, democratises journalism by making it accessible to smaller organisations and citizen journalists. MoJo excels in real-time reporting, allowing journalists to capture, edit, and share news instantly, meeting the demands of a fast-paced information landscape. The versatility of storytelling is enhanced through multimedia elements like photos and videos, providing a more engaging news experience. Additionally, MoJo facilitates direct audience engagement through social media, fostering stronger connections between journalists and their audience and expanding the reach of news stories. MoJo's cost efficiency, real- time capabilities, storytelling versatility, and audience engagement contribute to a dynamic and accessible journalistic landscape. To know better the benefits of MOJO for each of its stakeholders, let us discuss them one by one in detail: Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How does MoJo-enabled portability provide an edge over traditional
journalism?

4.2.1 For the Media Institutions
Mobile Journalism has contributed immensely to the advancement of media institutions, offering the following advantages: * Portability: Learners, as you must have anticipated by now, the paramount advantage of Mobile Journalism (MoJo) for media institutions is portability or the quality of being easily carried or moved. The news reporting scene is constantly changing, and adjusting and reacting to events as they happen quickly is essential. With gadgets like tablets and smartphones, MoJo enables journalists to take their newsroom around in their pockets. Because of its mobility, journalists can now easily collect, edit, and share news information from anywhere on the road without using bulky Outside Broadcast Vans (OBV). This adaptability guarantees that media organisations may keep a competitive advantage in providing timely and pertinent news content/ articles while also speeding up news creation. * Accessibility: Now, similar to portability, accessibility or the quality of being easily approached, entered and reached, is also one of the key areas where smaller cameras are making a significant difference' (Bock, 2009, p. 206). The smaller cameras ensure reaching and accessing news from difficult geographical locations and access to social interactions without people being conscious of heavy equipment. Reporters may more readily gather and disseminate news from various venues and communities thanks to mobile journalism, which helps reflect events more inclusively. Recall for a moment the daunting video clippings of people swept off by the flood water during the landslides in Uttarakhand or the outrage created over the video clipping of the public sexual abuse of two women in Manipur lately. Many such incidents were captured and disseminated using mobile devices. * Increased Efficiency and Real-Time Reporting: Mobile journalism allows reporters to gather and transmit news stories from the field quickly. This efficiency, in turn, contributes to a faster news cycle, keeping media institutions competitive in delivering timely content (Quinn, 2013). The portability and accessibility offered by MoJo enable journalists to cover breaking news in real time. Due to these features, reporters on the ground can now quickly capture and transmit footage, allowing the institution to provide updated minute coverage (Quinn, 2013) * Cost Savings and Resource Efficiency: Learners, you must be aware that traditional journalism often requires heavy investment in editing studios, camera equipment and hiring staff for each function. However, media organisations can benefit significantly from mobile journalism (MoJo), which promises higher resource efficiency and cost savings. By using common gadgets like tablets and cellphones, MoJo disrupts this paradigm. These affordable instruments simplify the entire news creation process and

eliminate the need for expensive equipment. Journalists can capture, edit, Benefits of Mobile and share information quickly while on the go, saving time and resources. Journalism MoJo also allows journalists to take on multiple responsibilities, making the newsroom more flexible and effective while reducing the need for a large workforce. By utilising existing mobile devices, media institutions can save on equipment costs. * Enhanced Engagement with Audiences: MoJo is cost-effective and allows media organisations to enable direct audience participation. Sharing news and opinions on topical issues on various social media platforms ensures instantaneous interactions through smartphones and other mobile- friendly substances, which aids organisations in forging closer bonds with their readers or viewers (Hermida, 2019). Also, MoJo makes interactive storytelling possible with features like live polls, dynamic visuals, and audience interaction. This makes the interaction between media professionals and their viewers lively and engaging. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Mention the advantages of MoJo for Media Institutions.

4.2.2 For the Newsrooms
After discussing the benefits of MoJo for media institutions, let us move further to understand how it is advantageous for newsrooms. In a newsroom workflow, mobile devices facilitate journalists to collect, curate, edit, publish and refine the content using the browser or native app from within and outside the newsroom. Following are some of the major benefits of mobile journalism in the media newsroom:
Figure 2: Benefits of Mojo for Newsroom
Source: ANI, https://www.aninews.in/news/business/digital-media-changing- the-face-of-press-releases20190610191027/ 61

Mobile And Society * Distributed Newsrooms: If we look at the benefits enabled by MoJo, especially in the context of newsrooms, the first and foremost has to be distributed newsrooms. MoJo facilitates remote contributions from media professionals by supporting the idea of distributed newsrooms. This adaptability is especially important in the age of remote employment and decentralised news outlets. Journalists in the conventional news environment were restricted to centralised places, which hindered their ability to react quickly to events as they happened. Mojo's use of mobile devices frees journalists from this limitation. * Enhanced Collaboration: Another interesting benefit ensured by Mojo is the facilitation of collaborative journalism that allows media professionals to share content and easily collaborate on projects in real time. This means media professionals can easily share material and work together in real- time using Mojo. This function is helpful in large newsroom settings or while working on joint reporting projects. Mojo's smooth content sharing allows media professionals to collaborate quickly and effectively beyond the limitations of conventional communication methods. In addition to speeding up the news creation process, this real-time contact improves the overall synergy in big newsrooms. Mojo facilitates instantaneous project collaboration by making the media environment dynamic and integrated. * Immediate Breaking News Coverage: Mojo enables journalists to respond quickly to breaking news circumstances by recording and distributing real-time updates. Because of the immediate nature of mobile devices, newsrooms are at the forefront of covering developing events, ensuring viewers are up to date on the newest information. For example, you can visualise how journalists with cell phones may quickly go live, providing on-the-spot coverage of breaking news events such as natural catastrophes, protests, or accidents. Also, you should know that such immediacy speeds up news delivery and contributes to the depth and authenticity of reporting. The capacity to respond quickly and efficiently to dynamic events shows how Mojo alters conventional newsrooms, allowing them to adapt to the needs of modern news reporting and engage viewers with personal stories. * Integration with Multimedia Storytelling: Newsrooms may use Mojo's multimedia capabilities to improve their narratives. How? Combining text, graphics, videos, and interactive features seamlessly converts news material into more immersive and fascinating tales. Now, you can imagine how this approach makes it easier to cater to a wide range of audience tastes while adding depth and complexity to the narrative process. That is not it; using many media elements also provides a more complete and dynamic portrayal of news items. In a nutshell, Mojo's multimedia features enable newsrooms to create captivating stories that connect with today's varied and technologically savvy audiences more successfully. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Mention the advantages of MoJo in the day-to-day workflow of a newsroom.

62

Benefits of Mobile
Journalism

4.2.3 For News Professionals
In the previous sections, we have learnt how the contemporary concept of MoJo has revolutionised media institutes and newsrooms. In this section, we will understand how it eases the work of media professionals.
Figure 3: Mojo-Enabled Portability: Benefits for Media Professionals
Source: iStock, https://www.istockphoto.com/search/2/image- film?phrase=mobile+journalism Research: Learners, the utility of MoJo for journalists begins right from the pre-production phase of news content. Journalists can use mobile devices for research, accessing information, conducting interviews, fact-checking, and staying updated on news developments. Here are some ways mobile devices contribute to the research aspect of journalism. * Information Retrieval: Just like you use your mobile devices to garner information on the topics of your choice, journalists, too, can access a great quantity of information on the Internet via mobile devices, allowing them to quickly gather background material, statistics, and historical context pertinent to their news content. This can be done through mobile devices to access online libraries, research papers, and other academic resources, allowing them to do an in-depth study on various issues. * Interviews and Communication: Besides information retrieval, journalists can also conduct interviews using mobile devices through standard phone calls or video conferencing apps. This increases the flexibility with which information may be gathered from sources even when the source is not physically present. * Social Media Monitoring: Mobile devices are also useful for tracking breaking news, trends, and public reactions on social media platforms. Journalists can thus remain current on developments and interact with the online community. * Fact-Checking on the Go: One of MoJo's most important advantages for journalists is using mobile devices to fact-check material in real time. This helps journalists ensure the accuracy of their reporting before publishing. 63

Mobile And Society * Location-Based Research: Finally, during the phase of research, journalists can also perform location-based research using mobile devices equipped with GPS. This is especially beneficial for on-the-ground reporting and investigative reporting.
Efficient Workflow Management
Besides aiding during research, MoJo simplifies media professionals' workflow management by providing a single device for capturing, editing, and distributing information. This integrated method, on the other hand, improves field efficiency and decreases the need for different instruments.
Quick Response to Emergencies
Also, how convenient is MoJo for media workers to respond promptly in emergencies? Unlike traditional journalism, MoJo can now be used for coming news to send real-time chiral measurements for more timely and accurate reporting.
Personal Branding
Another recent change you have observed is the identification of media professionals as personal brands. MoJo also encourages this Phenomenon. Media workers may use MoJo to improve their brand by directly connecting with viewers on social media, establishing a more accurate and instantaneous relationship. For example, Ravish Kumar started his YouTube channel to connect to his audience. To sum up all these benefits of MoJo for media professionals, we can now conveniently say that by giving tools for independent reporting, mobile journalism empowers journalists in multiple ways.
4.2.4 For the News Users
After learning about the pros of MoJo for media professionals, let us understand next what benefits MoJo has to offer to its users. Mobile Journalism (MoJo) brings several advantages for news consumers, enhancing their experience and interaction with news content. Here are ways in which MoJo benefits news users: * Immediate Access to Breaking News: As discussed in this Unit with MoJo, journalists can report and share breaking news in real-time. News users may also benefit from this by getting instant updates and remaining updated on current events as they develop. * Direct Interaction and Feedback: Like media professionals, news consumers can now utilise MoJo to interact directly with journalists and news organisations via social media platforms. MoJo encourages a more interactive relationship by allowing users to comment, ask questions, and engage in discussions. * Personalised Content Consumption: You must have noticed that you need more of an option to consume the information or content of your choice at your convenience in the case of traditional journalism (like

television news or newspapers). MoJo, however, offers you the option Benefits of Mobile for personalised content consumption, as you can now view and engage Journalism with content tailored to your interests. This adaptability enhances the user experience by providing relevant and customised news. Besides, MoJo also allows you to consume content on demand. You can access news stories at your convenience, providing flexibility in when and how you engage with the news. * Increased Transparency: As you know, MoJo enables instantaneous reporting and direct engagement with journalists. These features, in turn, ensure transparency in the news reporting process. Users may watch live events and participate in conversations that help them comprehend news stories better. * Community Building: Besides, MoJo's interactive features and social media integration help news consumers form communities. Users may join based on common interests, engage in discussions, and create virtual communities around certain news subjects. * Citizen Journalism Contributions: One of the most remarkable achievements of MoJo is that it enables individuals to participate in news reporting through user-generated material, which is technically called citizen journalism. This allows everyone, from you to me, to ministers to a rickshaw puller, with affordable mobile devices to report news and express their opinions on current events, encouraging a more active and democratic media environment. We will see in the further section how the concept of MoJo-enabled citizen journalism blurs the line between the consumer and producer.
4.2.5 For the Prosumers
Learners, it must be very interesting to know that the advent of social media has swiftly blurred the line between the "producers" and "consumers", giving rise to the newer concept of "prosumers". "Prosumer" is a portmanteau or the mix of two words, "producer" and "consumer". It refers to individuals who play a dual role in producing and consuming content. In media, prosumers actively consume news and information and contribute to content creation and distribution. Let us see how the emergence of mobile journalism can benefit the prosumers:
* Facilitator of Citizen Journalism and User-Generated Content: As
you have learnt in this chapter, MoJo facilitates citizen journalism that allows consumers to report on events and issues that matter to them. MoJo's accessibility allows consumers to be on the scene, capturing and sharing news stories from their unique perspectives. This implies that MoJo empowers consumers to contribute to news reporting through user-generated content. Prosumers may actively participate in the news- generating process by capturing and sharing photographs, videos, and personal narratives.

Figure 2: Citizen Journalism Source: Adobe Stock, https://stock.adobe.com/in/ search?k=%22citizen+journalism%22 * Hyper-localised news coverage: Unlike traditional journalism, MoJo- enabled prosumers may respond quickly to local events and developments. They may record and disseminate relevant news articles to their communities, adding to hyper-localised news coverage. Therefore, you can now get information/ news without a professional media person on the site. * Social Media Integration: MoJo's integration with social media platforms seamlessly facilitates the dissemination of user-generated news, permitting consumers to share content directly with their online communities. This direct interaction, in turn, multiplies the reach of user-generated material. * Crowd-sourced Journalism Collaborations: We have already discussed how "enhanced collaboration" is one of MoJo's advantages for media professionals in a newsroom. Similarly, MoJo facilitates crowd-sourced journalism collaborations. Prosumers can collaborate with other content creators, journalists, and organisations, contributing to collective news reporting and storytelling efforts. * Accessibility for Diverse Voices: MoJo also encourages a democratic media environment. This is ensured by allowing consumers from all walks of life to offer their perspectives. This inclusiveness helps to create a more diverse and representative media environment. Hence, next time you seem to have an opinion on the news on your social media, try not to keep it to yourself and share it with others on the same platform, contributing to strengthening democracy. * Upskilling and Access to Niche Topics: Aspiring journalists can use MoJo to hone their skills by getting instant feedback on their content. Consumers who are interested in a specific niche topic may also use MoJo to produce content that is suited to their needs. This enables the investigation and coverage of subjects that may need to gain wide coverage in conventional media. * Global Reach and Influence: MoJo also allows prosumers to reach a worldwide audience with their work. So, even if you are not working for a professional media house but are skilled, you may influence and engage with audiences worldwide because of social media integration and the 66 ubiquitous dissemination of mobile-generated content.

Benefits of Mobile
4.3 PLATFORM SPECIFIC BENEFITS
Journalism Learners, till now, we have discussed how MoJo has emerged as useful for its various stakeholders, including the media institutes, media professionals, consumers and prosumers. Let us have a look at its various benefits in the context of each social media platform. Mobile Journalism (MoJo) provides special benefits on numerous platforms, taking advantage of the unique qualities and characteristics of each. Following are some of the platform-specific advantages of the smooth practice of MoJo:
* Instagram: Visual Storytelling and Story Highlights
If one uses Instagram, he/she must be aware that it is primarily a visual/audio- visual-centric platform. For such a platform, MoJo seems an excellent choice. Journalists may utilise their mobile devices to take captivating images and short films, making information visually appealing and shareable. Also, MoJo allows journalists to generate and share story highlights on Instagram, creating a dynamic and accessible record of their news coverage. * YouTube: Vlogs and Live-Streaming Although Instagram seems ideal for short videos, YouTube is handy for full- length vlogs and documentaries. MoJo allows journalists to make vlogs and short documentaries directly from their mobile devices and disseminate them by uploading them to YouTube channels. Live streaming is another feature of YouTube that journalists or consumers can utilise via MoJo. They may use MoJo to live-stream various important events or newsworthy occurrences on YouTube, which allows for real-time contact with the audience and fast coverage of events.
* X: Hashtags and Focused Communication
X or Twitter also holds some specific benefits for the practice of MoJo by new- age journalists. For example, one must be familiar that one distinct feature of X

Mobile And Society is "hashtags". Journalists may use relevant hashtags to boost the discoverability of their work. They can participate in existing conversations and reach a larger audience interested in certain topics. Compared to other social media sites, the virality and trending nature of X (Twitter) hashtags allow MoJo- generated content to reach a larger and more diversified audience. As a result, using hashtags strategically is a Twitter-specific benefit that Mojo practitioners may leverage to increase the exposure and impact of their mobile journalism material. Also, if one thinks rationally, even the 280-character constraint on X (formerly Twitter) seems like a blessing in disguise for MoJo. Due to this limitation, mobile journalists must be innovative and emphasise crucial elements in their message. This necessitates distilling complicated topics into powerful narratives, a trait lacking in platforms with more generous character restrictions. * Facebook: Unprecedented Reach The statistics reveal that Facebook is the most used social media platform globally, with 2.9 million monthly active users worldwide (Statista, 2023). Hence, the most obvious advantage of this platform for MoJo is its diverse audience and unprecedented reach. With 2.9 billion monthly active users, Facebook gives an unmatched audience reach for Mojo-generated content. Journalists may leverage this enormous user base to share news and communicate with a broad global audience quickly. Its exclusive advantages are real-time features, multimedia-friendly settings, 360-degree videos, interactive features, community-building tools, and low cost. These advantages make it a particularly useful platform for Mobile Journalism practitioners. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. State with examples of some distinct features of YouTube and Facebook
that facilitate mobile journalism.

4.3.1 For Photography Benefits of Mobile
Journalism We have already discussed how various significant social media platforms aid MoJo. Now, let us learn about MoJo's advantages, specifically in the context of photography. In photography, MoJo offers a diverse yet effective platform for journalists to record, edit, and distribute visual information. It encourages a more dynamic and rapid approach to visual storytelling. Let us understand them one by one.
Figure 5: Benefits of Mojo for Photography
Source: Free Icons Library, https://icon-library.com/icon/camera-phone-icon-0. html
* Immediate Capture of Moments, Portability and Accessibility
To begin with, unlike traditional journalism, MoJo allows journalists to capture moments as they happen. We have already discussed earlier that the compact size of mobile devices enables journalists to carry a powerful camera with them wherever they go. This accessibility guarantees that photographers are constantly ready to chronicle events, even if they are unexpected or difficult. Mobile devices' instant access to the camera enables rapid and spontaneous shooting, which ensures that critical moments are not missed. Hence, there is no need to carry sophisticated cameras and lights and set them on tripods to take pictures. * Versatility in Photography Styles Also, the use of mobile devices supports experimentation with a variety of photographic genres. Journalists may utilise mobile devices to experiment with diverse methods and views, ranging from standard photojournalism to creative and artistic approaches. * Real-Time Photo Editing Learners in conventional journalism have a dedicated photo/video editor who edits photos/videos after receiving them from the reporter. However, with the advent of MoJo, real-time picture/video editing software is available on mobile devices/tablets. Hence, the reporters can now edit and improve their pictures/ videos after clicking/recording them. The instant edit ensures the news content is ready for publishing or social media distribution.

Mobile And Society * Integration with Social Media and Live Photo Sharing Besides being beneficial for on-the-spot editing, MoJo allows journalists to share photos in real time on various social media platforms or the organisation's online websites or pages, providing audiences with immediate visual updates. Mojo interacts smoothly with social networking channels, allowing photographers to share their work with audiences directly. The immediate sharing of visual material expands its reach and effect. Live photo sharing is especially impactful in breaking news situations, where visuals are crucial in conveying the story. * Live Streaming MoJo's live streaming feature has made covering events live more convenient. MoJo enhances photography by allowing photographers and viewers to communicate in real time. This real-time interaction gives viewers a personal peek at the creative process, encouraging openness and authenticity. Furthermore, live streaming allows for interactive contact, allowing photographers to reply to comments and inquiries, resulting in a dynamic and engaging experience. * Interactive Photo Features Learners and mobile devices also support characteristics that provide photography with an immersive depth, which allows journalists to generate more interesting visual material. For example, mobile devices can support interactive picture features such as 360-degree photographs and augmented reality (AR). While 360-degree photographs capture a whole scene, allowing viewers to study it from every aspect. Augmented Reality (AR) is the addition of computer-generated components to the actual environment to enhance the user's perspective. Both technologies provide photography, the narrative immersive and interactive qualities.
4.3.2 For Audio Bytes/ Podcasts
It is not just photography; one must know that MoJo comes in handy even when taking audio bytes or producing podcasts for journalistic purposes. Mobile journalism has made a paradigm shift regarding audio storytelling, giving journalists unparalleled immediacy and flexibility in capturing and sharing audio information. Let us discuss some of the benefits MoJo offers, particularly in the context of audio bytes or podcasts. Since we are considering the positive implications of MoJo of audio bytes, the first advantage that has to be mentioned is the on-the-spot recording and reporting. The ability of Mobile Journalism (MoJo) to record and report spontaneously is a major advantage, particularly when it comes to obtaining real audio bytes. Reporters equipped with cell phones may quickly capture interviews, ambient sounds, and breaking news, offering unfiltered footage in real time. In contrast, traditional journalism may be delayed due to technical limits and logistical obstacles. MoJo's agility provides real-time coverage, creating a feeling of immediacy and authenticity. Unlike the traditional, potentially time- consuming, and less flexible technique, quickly collecting and sharing audio bytes enables journalists to present a more dynamic and responsive account of events, increasing the audience's connection to unfolding stories.

Besides, mobile devices with MoJo capabilities make conducting interviews Benefits of Mobile easier. Journalists can quickly collect various opinions and voices, creating a Journalism more inclusive and dynamic audio story. Another comparative advantage of MoJo over traditional journalism is adaptable scripting. MoJo supports customisable scripting, which allows journalists the flexibility to record programmed audio bytes. This flexibility is especially useful for various content genres, from quick news updates to in- depth feature pieces. Shifting between scripted and unscripted content allows journalists to accommodate various audience tastes, resulting in a varied and compelling audio narrative experience. MoJo's audio bytes enable journalists to capture and distribute narratives from remote or difficult locations. Journalists can capture the ambience of these locations through rich audio storytelling, whether they are reporting from a rural town or a remote location. Especially in today's fast-paced world, when everyone is in a rush and cannot pay focused attention to books or videos, podcasts seem like a solution to remain updated. MoJo caters to on-the-go consumers with the simplicity of mobile access, giving fast, digestible, and dynamic information via podcasts. Its agility is in sync with today's lifestyle, allowing users to be informed and engaged throughout commuting, exercising, and daily activities. The ability to absorb material in audio forms allows for multitasking, smoothly integrating into the hectic schedules of those who prefer to listen rather than watch or read. MoJo's flexibility in meeting modern time restrictions makes it an invaluable tool for fulfilling the changing demands of today's audiences.
4.3.3 For Video Bytes/ Streaming
Learners, just like audio bytes, MoJo have distinctive advantages over video bytes. MoJo's dramatic influence on video journalism is similarly noticeable, providing journalists with unparalleled visual narrative and live transmission opportunities. Let us get an insight into them one by one. As discussed earlier, one of MoJo's distinguishing characteristics is the freedom it provides journalists from the limits of traditional, heavy equipment. Journalists can now easily collect video bytes with only a cell device, eliminating the need for bulky camera equipment. This unrestricted movement translates to a new degree of flexibility for journalists, allowing them to be flexible and sensitive to emerging events without sacrificing the quality of their visual narrative. MoJo's mobility is demonstrated by its quick setup time. Imagine being a journalist: You can now instantly go from taking audio bytes to recording video, decreasing the delay between modes of news generation. The ease of setup improves the whole workflow, allowing journalists to focus on storytelling rather than technical preparations. Since we are discussing video bytes, MoJo enabled the feature to stream live video, which cannot be left. Now, journalists can transmit live video bytes

Mobile And Society from the site, giving viewers an unedited and real-time glimpse of events. The immediate nature of live streaming encourages a stronger bond between journalists and their audiences, changing news consumption into a participatory practice. Also, MoJo simplifies the video editing process, allowing journalists to edit and publish high-quality content. MoJo gives journalists fast access to editing capabilities on their mobile devices. Talking in the context of video bytes, one should also realise that MoJo's mobility is supported by improved field connection. Journalists can now use mobile devices to connect to newsrooms, post material, and interact with audiences. This connectedness keeps journalists in the loop and allows them to adapt their coverage to changing developments in the field. Finally, MoJo's mobility allows adaptability in shooting situations. It helps journalists easily move and collect video bytes in dense metropolitan situations, isolated areas, or limited spaces. MoJo's versatility in various shooting settings allows journalists to cover topics in previously difficult environments for standard camera setups. .
4.4 LET'S SUM UP
In this chapter, we have understood the various benefits of Mobile Journalism (MOJO) for its stakeholders. We discussed its advantages for media institutions, newsrooms, and media professionals. We also looked at how MOJO positively impacts news consumers and consumers. Furthermore, we developed an understanding of how specific social media platforms like YouTube, Instagram, and Facebook facilitate the practice of mobile journalism. Then, the Unit moved forward to explain the benefits of mobile journalism specific to photography. Finally, we concluded the Unit by discussing how mobile journalism has revolutionised the concepts of audio and video bytes. In a nutshell, the chapter provided a comprehensive idea of the advantages of mobile journalism in the contemporary world of journalism.
4.5 KEYWORDS
MOJO (Mobile Journalism) is the practice of using portable electronic devices to produce news stories. This includes reporting, editing, and distributing news from the field without needing traditional, bulkier equipment. Breaking News: Information being received and broadcast about an event that has just happened or begun. Podcast: An audio file similar to a radio broadcast, which can be downloaded and listened to on a computer, mp3 player, mobile phone, etc. Video Bytes: Video Byte is a 1-2 minute overview of your work. This video is 72 geared towards a lay audience and shows the impact of your work on society.

Live Streaming: Live streaming is when the streamed video is sent over the Benefits of Mobile Internet in real-time without first being recorded and stored. Journalism Prosumers: This is a portmanteau or mix of two words, "producer" and "consumer ."It refers to individuals who play a dual role in producing and consuming content.
4.6 FURTHER READINGS
1. Aviles, J.A.G., Leon, B., Sanders, K., Harrison, J. (2004). Journalists at
digital television newsrooms in Britain and Spain: Workflow and multi- skilling in a competitive environment, Journalism Studies, 5 (1), 87-100
2. Brown, H., Guskin, E., Mitchell, A. (2012). The Role of Social Media in
the Arab Uprisings, Pew Research Center, URL: http://www.journalism. org/2012/11/28/role-social-media-arabuprisings/
3. Burum, I. (2016). Democratising journalism through mobile media: The
mojo revolution, New York, Routledge
4. Burum, I. (2017). Mojo Workin' - Essential Mobile Journalism Tools,
Global Investigative Journalism Network, URL: http://gijn.org/2017/04/11/
mojo-workin-essential-mobilejournalism-tools/
5. Hemmingway, E. (2008). Into the Newsroom: Exploring the Digital
Production of Regional Television News, London, Routledge
6. Hermida, A. (2016). Tell everyone Why we share and why it matters.
Anchor Canada.
7. Karhunen, P. (2017). Closer to the story? Accessibility and mobile
journalism. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. University of Oxford.
8. Quinn, S. (2013). Mobile phones and journalism, in Bruck, B. A. and Rao
M, Global Mobile: Applications and Innovations for the Worldwide Mobile Ecosystem, New Jersey, Information Today, Inc., 213-226. Available from: http://site.ebrary.com.
9. Statista (2023), Most popular social networks worldwide as of October
2023, ranked by number of monthly active users, https://www.statista.com/ statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-number-of-users/
10. Wallace, S. (2009). Watchdog or witness? The emerging forms and practices
of videojournalism, Journalism, 10 (5), 684-701
11. Wallace, S. (2013). The complexities of convergence: Multiskilled
journalists working in BBC regional multimedia newsrooms, The International Communication Gazette, 75(1), 99-117
12. Wenger, D.H. & Potter, D. (2012). Advancing the Story - Broadcast
Journalism in a Multimedia World, Washington D.C., CQ Press.
13. Westlund, O. (2013). Mobile News, Digital Journalism, 1 (1), 6-26
White, T. and Barnas, F. (2011) Broadcast News - Writing, Reporting and Producing, 5th ed., Burlington, Focal Press

4.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1 Mobile journalism is characterised by its agility, immediacy, and the integration of multimedia elements in storytelling. Its cost-effectiveness, leveraging ubiquitous smartphones, democratises journalism by making it accessible to smaller organisations and citizen journalists. MoJo excels in real-time reporting, allowing journalists to capture, edit, and share the news instantly. The versatility of storytelling is enhanced through multimedia elements like photos and videos, providing a more engaging news experience. Additionally, MoJo facilitates direct audience engagement through social media, fostering stronger connections between journalists and their audience and expanding the reach of news stories. MoJo's cost efficiency, real-time capabilities, storytelling versatility, and audience engagement contribute to a dynamic and accessible journalistic landscape. Check Your Progress: 2
Portability; Accessibility; Increased Efficiency and Real-time Time Reporting;
Cost Savings and Resource Efficiency; and Enhanced Engagement with
Audiences. Check Your Progress: 3
Distributed Newsrooms; Enhanced Collaboration; Immediate Breaking News
Coverage; and Integration with Multimedia Storytelling. Check Your Progress: 4
YouTube: Vlogs and Live-Streaming
YouTube is handy for full-length vlogs and documentaries. MoJo allows journalists to make vlogs and short documentaries directly from their mobile devices and disseminate them by uploading them to YouTube channels. Live streaming is another feature of YouTube that journalists or consumers can utilise via MoJo. They may use MoJo to live-stream various important events or newsworthy occurrences on YouTube, which allows for real-time contact with the audience and fast coverage of events.
Facebook: Unprecedented Reach
The most obvious advantage of this platform for MoJo is the diverse audience and the unprecedented reach. With 2.9 billion monthly active users, Facebook gives an unmatched audience reach for Mojo-generated content. Journalists may leverage this enormous user base to share news and communicate with a broad global audience quickly. Its exclusive advantages are real-time features, multimedia-friendly settings,

360-degree videos, interactive features, community-building tools, and low Benefits of Mobile cost. These advantages make it a particularly useful platform for Mobile Journalism Journalism practitioners.

UNIT 5 MOBILE NEWS CONSUMPTION
PATTERNS
Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.2 News for Citizens Vs Consumers
5.2.1 Citizens Vs. Consumers
5.2.2 Theories Related to Consumer Preferences
5.2.3 Impact of Consumer Preferences on News Production
5.3 Media and Its Advantages in News Consumption
5.3.1 Print Media
5.3.2 Electronic and Digital Media
5.4 Snacking/ Grazing on the News
5.5 Mobile News Consumption: Patterns, People, Place and Participation
5.6 Reuters Institute's Digital News Report 2023: Key Findings
5.7 National and Global Challenges Due to Changes in News
Consumption Patterns
5.8 Mobile News Consumption and Rise of Misinformation and
Disinformation
5.9 Future of Mobile News and Its Impact
5.10 Let Us Sum Up
5.11 Keywords
5.12 Further Readings
5.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
Learners, imagine yourself leisurely perusing your social media feed, keeping up with your friends' latest posts. Suddenly, your attention is drawn to a headline. You are engrossed in the most recent advancements while reading a news item on your mobile device, which is a comfortable environment. We will discuss that in this unit when we address mobile news consumption. Now, this mobile news thing is more than just a fleeting trend. Mobile phones constitute the sixth mass media after printing records, movies, radio, television, and the Internet. Do you recall those large newspapers and certain news periodicals? With customisable feeds, social network integration, and even user-generated material at your fingertips, mobile news completely disregards

convention. Regarding convenience, research indicates that mobile news is the Mobile News most user-friendly and beneficial. Your phone provides instantaneous updates Consumption Patterns whenever and wherever you are; forget about carrying a laptop or waiting for the nightly news. The fact that 72% of Americans rely on their phones for news (Pew Research Center, 2023) and check for updates many times a day (Reuters Institute, 2023) helps to explain the rise in mobile news consumption. This is the same scenario throughout the world. However, there is also the other side of it. Yes, we continuously check our phones, but such interactions are short- lived--they only last a few minutes (Reuters Institute, 2023). Our ability to focus seems to be waning as a result. Slogans, teases, and little films take centre stage, with lengthier pieces falling to the wayside. In this unit, we will gain insight into the contemporary phenomenon of mobile news consumption and its pervasiveness in the modern world. We will also analyse the pros and cons of the same. Figure 1: Mobile News (Source: Freepik, www.freepik.com)
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Differentiate between news for Citizens and Consumers; * Describe different theories related to consumer preferences; * Analyse the impact of consumer preferences on news production; * Discuss different media and their advantages in news consumption; * Conceptualise the idea of snacking/ grazing on the news; * Describe the 4Ps of Mobile News Consumption: Patterns, People, Place
and Participation;
* Analyse the key findings of Reuters Institute & Digital News Report 2023 and how the Covid-19 has impacted the news consumption; * Locate the national and global challenges due to changes in news consumption patterns; and * Examine the future of mobile news and its impact.

5.2 NEWS FOR CITIZENS VS CONSUMERS
Learners, you have probably observed an excessive amount of information available in today's news environment; much of it occupies a vague middle ground between educating the public and entertaining readers. This may have confused you since it raises a basic question: What is in the public's best interests? News intended primarily for amusement and transient engagement, or news that fosters educated democratic participation? By examining the distinctions between "news for citizens" and "news for consumers," one can better comprehend the answers to these questions. Fundamentally, news for citizens is a necessary component of a robust democracy. It delves into complex topics, provides in-depth analysis, and promotes critical thinking. This increased level of involvement allows citizens to engage actively in public life. Investigative journalism best shows this concept, which exposes injustices, holds institutions of power responsible and sparks vital public conversation. Investigative journalism makes society's problems more visible, enables people to demand change, and promotes social justice. However, the contemporary environment also prioritises leisure and personal fulfilment to satisfy the customer. This strategy frequently uses attention- grabbing headlines, celebrity rumours, and customised material feeds catering to niche audiences and limited attention spans. Even though this material could draw in a larger audience, it risks forgoing depth and meaningful involvement in favour of transient engagement and light pleasure. The emphasis moves from comprehending complicated problems to short bursts that offer transient entertainment or approval. The whole shift is towards infotainment. Figure 2: Citizen Vs Consumer (Sources: Created by Gan Khoon Lay, from The Noun Project, and Flaticon, www.flaticon.com )
5.2.1 Citizens Vs. Consumers
So, learners, think briefly about how a 'consumer' differs from a 'citizen'. In academic terms, consumers are primarily motivated by personal demands and market pressures, whereas citizens are concerned with the common good and their obligations to the state. Customers have market-driven agency through their choices, but citizens have political agency through their involvement in democracy.

Especially when you look at the divide between 'citizen' and 'consumer', Mobile News especially in the context of news consumption and creation, you will notice that Consumption Patterns the basic distinction lies in perspective and intent. Citizens, as news consumers, view information with a civic mindset, aiming to keep informed in order to participate actively in democratic processes. Their motives stem from a duty to contribute significantly to society, encouraging civic participation through voting and community involvement. In contrast, news consumers view information as a commodity, motivated by personal preferences or entertainment value. This thinking might result in more passive news consumption, giving sensationalism or validating pre-existing opinions precedence over civic duties. Citizens and consumers differ in how they produce news, with citizens contributing to public debate through community reporting, participatory journalism, and educated conversations. On the other hand, consumers indirectly shape news agendas based on entertainment value rather than public service through market-driven preferences. There is a crucial distinction between media literacy and critical thinking. While consumers may not always have the disposition for such judgement, citizens must actively assess sources and do fact-checking. Ultimately, it is critical to grasp these differences to appreciate how media consumption is changing fully and its significant effects on democratic societies. Maintaining the integrity of democratic ideas requires striking a balance between the demand for a critically aware and involved populace and consumerist inclinations. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Differentiate between Citizens and Consumers?

5.2.2 Theories Related to Consumer Preferences
In the contemporary digital landscape, the consumer preferences of mobile news consumption can be better understood through the lens of the following theories: * Scarcity Theory of Attention Paying attention is a valuable asset in a world where information is abundant. Content that instantly captures their interest has a strong visual presence, and provides instant satisfaction is given priority by consumers. This is especially true when consuming news on the go, as innumerable diversions and bite- sized material quickly divert our attention. According to the hypothesis, our capacity for processing information is finite, much like a finite energy pool. We prioritise the stimulus that quickly grabs our attention when presented with many competing options. This translates to attention-grabbing headlines, eye- catching images that flash across the screen, and short-form films that offer 79

Mobile And Society immediate information or entertainment in the mobile news space. Like vividly coloured sweets, these attention-grabbing morsels tempt us with the promise of a rapid dopamine rush, frequently at the price of more complex, nuanced information. * Theory of Social Currency According to the social currency theory's fundamental tenets, users appreciate material they can debate and share with others in their social networks, elevating their status and creating virtual communities. This inclination is a boon for platforms that profit from user-generated content and viral trends. Not only is information consumed in the flurry of mobile news consumption, but it is also shared, exchanged, and turned into social currency. According to social currency theory, content shared online has value in addition to its inherent worth. Its social significance--its capacity to indicate our affiliation with particular groups, interests, and ideologies--is the source of this worth. A thoughtful piece on climate change, a clever political tweet, or a well-captioned joke may all act as digital tokens, building social capital and fostering relationships on the Internet. Therefore, the theory offers a useful framework for comprehending how people utilise news material on their mobile devices to establish online identities, signal allegiance, and improve their social status. * Theory of Social Presence Social Presence theory was initially published in "The Social Psychology of Telecommunications" by John Short, Ederyn Williams, and Bruce Christie. It was built upon the theoretical underpinnings of interpersonal communication and symbolic interactionism. Social Presence Theory looks at how user engagement and trust are impacted by the "realness" or "immediacy" users perceive in news material when consuming it on a mobile device. It claims that although news content is important in and of itself, user engagement and trust are surprisingly shaped by the sense of connection that one has with the material and the source. One might feel they are "present" at the news event using interactive features, live-streamed reporting, and reporter comments accompanied by images. Building rapport and trust may increase the audience's openness to the information. Additionally, news platforms may help close the gap between passive viewers and active participants by promoting user involvement through polls, comments, and Q&A sessions. This reciprocal communication can improve the impression of social presence when appropriately managed. Selective exposure and Uses and Gratification Theory are other related theories that may be applied to understand the preferences of mobile news consumers. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the Theory of Social Currency?

80

5.2.3 Impact of Consumer Preferences on News Production Mobile News
Consumption Patterns
After learning about the theories of consumer preferences, let us now try to comprehend how consumer preference implicates news production in the current media landscape. Explaining how customer choices affect the creation of news, Franklin (1997) states that the editorial goals of journalism have shifted. If you look at studies, it reveals that the information provision has given way to entertainment; public interest has taken the place of human interest; reasoned analysis has given way to emotionalism; the trivial has triumphed over the serious; and the private lives of celebrities, whether from soap operas, professional sports, or the royal family, are now deemed more "newsworthy" than the coverage of important issues and events with global implications. (Franklin, 1997, p. 4). New values have supplanted traditional ones, and "infotainment" is pervasive. There is testimony that tabloid newspapers have mostly stopped covering topics that do not draw readers because they are driven by market research. This has inevitably resulted in increased crime tales, sports coverage, and celebrity rumours but decreased international news and government coverage. The amount of time that broadsheets cover Parliament has decreased. These critics contend that contemporary news media's consumer-centred and market-driven structure has fostered declining news provision tendencies. Viewers' capacity to participate in political life is undermined if unimportant stories overshadow significant news. According to Bennett (1992), a media outlet that is preoccupied with the spectacle of news has the potential to deprive its audience of the ability to engage actively in political life. They are no longer active participants in the democratic dialogue but passive recipients. Data also show that contrary to popular belief, a news organisation's reputation or brand influences customers' choice of where to get news. This is especially true for mobile devices, as opposed to desktop or laptop computers. Indeed, suggestions from friends do not yet play a significant role in determining how much news is consumed, even despite the increase in the usage of social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter.
5.3 MEDIA AND ITS ADVANTAGES IN NEWS
CONSUMPTION
Media has a big impact on how we receive and consume news, and it has several benefits over more conventional approaches like word-of-mouth or printed newspapers. In the modern world, news consumption requires a diversified strategy because several media platforms are vying for viewers' attention. Every media, from print newspapers to the instantaneous world of digital media, has certain benefits when learning about current affairs. While concentrated interaction with in-depth material in conventional print media stimulates deep cognitive processing and critical analysis, digital platforms guarantee immediacy and accessibility through personalised content streams and real-time updates. On the one hand, broadcast media, a long-standing institution, engages viewers through engaging visual narratives and shared experiences. However, digital media stands out for its unequalled interaction

Mobile And Society and community-driven conversation. The following are the media-specific advantages of news consumption:
5.3.1 Print Media
Despite being perceived as outdated, print media offers unique advantages for news consumption that set it apart from its digital counterparts. * For instance, studies prove that reading print literature instead of reading digitally improves comprehension and deeper cognitive processing. Print's materiality and linear structure promote reading more slowly, actively engaging with the text, and retaining information better. This is especially useful for factual or sophisticated information. * In contrast to digital platforms, which offer endless notifications and incentives to multitask, the paper provides a distraction-free atmosphere. * The tangible quality of print media might offer an impression of reliability in an era of 'fake news' and online disinformation. According to research by Wojciesiak and Wen (2018) and Newman et al. (2015), consumers often view print media as trustworthy and reputable than internet sources. Figure 3: Advantages of Print Media News Consumption (Source: Free Icon Library, https://icon-library.com/icon/print-media-icon-16.html.html) * Reading in print may be an immersive experience that increases emotional involvement and fosters a closer bond with the news content. Research conducted by Stone (1989) and Harris (2005) indicates that print readers exhibit superior knowledge memory and a more intense emotional reaction to tales than their digital counterparts. * Time spent on digital screens has been connected to higher levels of stress, anxiety, and disturbed sleep. Reading in print can help you unwind and provide a mental break from the never-ending brightness and scrolling. According to research by Wallach et al. (2015) and Park et al. (2019), reading on paper can improve general well-being and lessen digital tiredness. * Print news provides a distinctive sensory experience in contrast to the impersonal interface of digital screens. * The feel of paper, the scent of ink, and the visual arrangement of text and images may all contribute to an aesthetically attractive and engaging 82 reading experience.

5.3.2 Electronic and Digital Media Mobile News
Consumption Patterns
Let us start by understanding what electronic and digital media refer to. Electronic media refers to a wide range of communication technologies that rely on electronically created and delivered material. The scope of electronic media is continually shifting as technology advances and user tastes shift. However, some key categories include (a) broadcast media (that includes traditional television and radio channels streaming services offering similar content), (b) digital media (that includes websites, online news portals, social media platforms, mobile apps, digital publishing platforms), (c) interactive media (video games, virtual reality experiences, augmented reality applications), and (d) new media (emerging technologies like artificial intelligence-powered content). While print media has its merits, electronic media dominates the current news environment, providing information with unprecedented speed, reach, and flexibility. Following are some of its advantages: Figure 4: Electronic Media (Source: Flaticon, www.flaticon.com) Figure 5: Digital Media News Consumption (Source: Flaticon, www.flaticon. com) * Broadcast media allows immediate access to breaking news and live events, frequently reaching greater audiences simultaneously than internet channels. This is especially important in fast-changing events like natural catastrophes or major breaking news. Studies have shown that television remains the preferred news source during important events, proving its capacity to swiftly cut through the noise and reach huge audiences. (Wojciesiak & Wen, 2018; Newman et al., 2015) * Multimedia learning can boost knowledge retention and engagement, underlining the benefits of broadcast media in presenting news effectively (Salomon, 2008). * Broadcast media can reach those with limited technology or live in places with inadequate internet access. This guarantees that everyone has the chance to keep informed, regardless of socio-economic status or technology literacy. According to the Pew Research Centre (2023), radio is an important news source for rural areas and elderly persons, demonstrating its sustained significance to many consumers. 83

Mobile And Society * Electronic media allows for preservation and on-demand access. Online news archives serve as an easily available library of past events, allowing readers to explore historical material, compare opinions on various issues, and trace the evolution of news articles over time. This makes examining facts easier, gaining a better knowledge of difficult situations, and conducting historical analyses. * Furthermore, electronic media may be an effective instrument for investigative journalism, offering venues for whistle-blowers, exposing injustices, and holding officials responsible. Furthermore, internet databases and transparency projects frequently provide individuals access to government papers and decision-making processes, encouraging public knowledge and civic involvement. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the advantages of Electronic and Digital Media for news production
and distribution.

5.4 SNACKING/ GRAZING ON THE NEWS
Mobile technology can potentially exacerbate the trend toward snacking on the news to the extent that it encourages shorter, dispersed consumption patterns and that mobile news use displaces other forms of news consumption. Mobile technology can worsen the trend of news snacking by encouraging shorter, scattered consumption patterns and replacing traditional modes of news consumption. However, what does 'snacking' or 'grazing' mean in mobile news consumption? The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to people absorbing the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. This behaviour resembles how someone would nibble on modest food throughout the day. Figure 6: Snacking on News (Source: The Noun Project, https://thenounproject. com/ )

Scholars have frequently criticised the public's lack of attention to the news, Mobile News claiming that individuals often 'snack' or 'graze' on it. While this behaviour Consumption Patterns might occur on any platform, it was notably noted in connection to television remote control and channel flipping (Pew et al., 2012), as well as the Internet's multitude of channels and quick-hit Web sites and links (Bucy et al., 2014). The DVRs and mobile phones offer flexible media consumption options, including when, where, and quantity. The Internet and digital media are ideal for news consumption due to their ease, cheap cost, and emphasis on user control. For example, DVRs and mobile phones control when, where, and the amount of media consumed. Others have reiterated the significance of user control, claiming that the Internet and digital media give this as well as convenience and relatively cheap cost, making them particularly well adapted to news snacking. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Define the term snacking/ grazing.

5.5 MOBILE NEWS CONSUMPTION:
PATTERNS, PEOPLE, PLACE AND
PARTICIPATION
Learners, let us move further and learn how mobile news is consumed. Who consumes it? Moreover, how do the audiences participate in the news production process? Figure 7: Consumer News Preference (Source: Created by Hanbai, from The Noun Project, https://thenounproject.com/ ) Let us begin by discussing the 'Patterns' of mobile news consumption. * Starting with the general patterns of mobile news consumption--accessing the news through mobile devices as platforms--several studies show a

Mobile And Society sharp increase after the initial years of smartphone dissemination with touchscreens. For instance, cross-cultural studies carried out in the US and Europe in 2012 and 2013 reveal a notable rise in the consumption of mobile news, which is beginning to encroach on computer-based online news. * Investigations of print, computer, mobile, and tablet usage for individual newspapers in Sweden have indicated both displacing and complementing impacts. In Japan, research concluded that mobile news was complementary to heritage news media. * Furthermore, research from the United States indicates that individuals spend more time getting news overall (Sasseen et al., 2013), whilst research from Portugal indicates that people use mobile news less frequently than internet news. Figure 8: Pattern, People, Place and Participation (Source: https:// iconscout.com/ ) Now, let us get a deeper insight into the 'People' who consume mobile news. * People's varied usage is plausibly one of the reasons for the contradictory results regarding the people mostly involved in mobile news consumption. For example, Swedish research has demonstrated notable variations based on age (Westlund & Fardigh, 2015) and generational affiliation (Westlund & Weibull, 2013). * Studies conducted in the United States with college students have demonstrated a substantial correlation between mobile news consumption and total news media usage patterns (Chan-Olmsted et al., 2013). * Teenagers in Sweden have also shown similar results (Westlund & Bjur,
2013) . Numerous researches have confirmed the significance of age,
gender, and educational attainment in stratification (Westlund & Weibull, 2013; Wolf & Schnauber, 2014). According to a Swedish study, educated males between 15 and 49 are considerably more likely to use mobile news often than other men. It should come as no surprise that most smartphone users are heavy users. * A cross-cultural European study confirmed the significance of age and educational attainment. However, it also revealed that those in jobs and relationships are likelier than singles and homemakers to access mobile 86 news (Fortunati et al., 2014).

Furthermore, let us discuss how mobile news consumption varies with the Mobile News change in 'Place'. Consumption Patterns * One would be surprised to know that studies discovered that mobile media use is widespread when both commuting and at work (Taneja et al., 2012). Also, it was found that mobile news consumption occurs predominantly when on the go and amid daily life (Dimmick et al., 2011). * Recent research indicates that mobile news is widely accessed in many settings, including work and home (Schroder, 2014), with less "context stability" than traditional news sources. This implies that mobile news consumption varies greatly depending on location, time, and other daily activities (Wolf & Schnauber, 2014). * People use mobile devices to obtain news anytime and from any location. Meanwhile, learners, it is worth mentioning that individuals were first apprehensive about using cell phones with touchscreens (Westlund,
2007) . Furthermore, standards are evolving around where and when it
is permissible to use a smartphone, which may influence the locations of use. Finally, let us quickly understand how audiences 'Engage/Participate' in news production; * When one looks at different types of engagement/participation, one may see two distinct research threads. First, there are many studies on the dissolving borders between 'produsage' (Bruns, 2012), a portmanteau of the words 'producer' and 'user'. Much research in journalism studies has focused on how viewers engage (or do not participate) in the news- producing process (Lewis, 2012; Lewis & Westlund, 2015). * However, such research has almost solely focused on computer-based behaviours, with only a few assessments of engagement/participation in news via mobile devices. An exception to this rule is research conducted in China that examined how college students used their mobile devices to read and follow news postings on microblogs like Twitter. The study found that this type of consumption was increasing and that the so-called expectation value of mobile news was a good indicator of this trend (Wei et al., 2013). * According to a different survey, college students prefer to follow the news through friends and connections on their mobile devices rather than consciously and actively looking for news websites. (Mihailidis, 2014). * Many studies have been conducted on the relationship between political engagement and mobile news consumption, which, in a broader sense, is related to democracy, information access, and mobilisation (Liu, 2013). * Also, the use of mobile media for political news correlates with particular political participation measures. Demographics and socio-economic status also play a role in predicting the use of mobile media by various groups of people. (Campbell & Kwak, 2010; Kwak, Campbell, Choi, & Bae, 2011; Lee, Kwak, Campbell, & Ling, 2014).

Mobile And Society Check Your Progress: 5
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is 'produsage'?

5.6 REUTERS INSTITUTE'S DIGITAL NEWS
REPORT 2023: KEY FINDINGS
Learners, since we are learning about mobile news, we need to get acquainted with the current status of online news consumption. One of the authentic data regarding the same is generated by the Reuters Institute. The Reuters Institute's 2023 Digital News Report reveals major developments in online news consumption trends throughout the globe. The Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism is devoted to investigating the global future of journalism via discussion, involvement, and research. Figure 9: Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2023 (Source: https:// reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/digital-news-report/2023 ) Now, let us have a look at the key highlights of the report: * Firstly, the 2023 Digital News Report indicates the shifting patterns in online news consumption in India. You can understand the pervasiveness of mobile news consumption because Indians are shifting from traditional news websites to search engines and mobile news aggregators (43%)-- online platforms or software devices that compile news stories--as their main sources of online news, per the report. * The report also highlights the lower percentage of newspaper readers in the country. As per the report, only 12% of people prefer to read news from newspapers or other direct sources, whereas 28% prefer to read news on social media. * The Digital News Report 2023 also states how the population of India prefers to consume their news. It reflects that Indians prefer watching or listening to news content over reading it.

* The report found regional differences in online news engagement in a Mobile News global scenario. While Scandinavian nations continue to work closely with Consumption Patterns well-known news organisations, social media is particularly important in Asia, Latin America, and Africa. * Also, preferences for news consumption vary across countries. For example, Finland and the UK have high reading rates (80%). On the other hand, forty per cent (40%) of people in India and Thailand choose to watch the news online. Besides, 52% of Filipinos say they prefer video news.
Impact of COVID-19 on News Consumption
The report also underlines the ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic affected news consumption and preferences. In India, the amount of news read and shared is dropping alarmingly. According to data, access to internet news dropped precipitously by 12% points from 2022 to 2023. Also, television watching has declined by 10%, particularly among younger and urban populations. Moreover, a portion of the decrease in news engagement can be attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic's waning impact once lockdown regulations were loosened in April 2022. * Highlighting the issue of trust in news, the report suggested that between 2021 and 2023, trust in news in India remained stable at 38%, ranking among the lowest in the Asia-Pacific region. In contrast to India, there is more confidence in nations like Finland (69%) and Portugal (58%). However, confidence is also lower in nations with stronger political polarisation, such as Greece (19%), Argentina (30%), Hungary (25%), and the United States (32%). Check Your Progress: 6 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the impact of Covid-19 on news consumption.

5.7 NATIONAL AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES
DUE TO CHANGES IN NEWS
CONSUMPTION PATTERNS
As discussed earlier in this unit, mobile news is a double-edged sword with its share of advantages and disadvantages. The following are some of the issues that both India and the entire world are facing as a result of changes in news consumption patterns: * Misinformation and Fake News 89

Mobile And Society Moving away from conventional news sources and towards search engines and social media may aid in disseminating disinformation and fake news. This can result in widespread misunderstanding, incorrect beliefs and even civil upheaval. Figure 10: Rise of Misinformation and Disinformation (Source: Vector Stock, www.VectorStock.com/35599102 ) * Quality of Journalism Declining interest in traditional news sources may influence the quality of journalism. Independent and reputable journalism may suffer financial difficulties, resulting in decreased investigative reporting and in-depth analysis. * Democracy and Polarisation Using social media as a news source might lead to political polarisation. People may be exposed to biased information, affecting the democratic process. Figure 11: Challenges of Mobile News Consumption (Democracy and Polarization). (Source: Created by Bakhtiar Zein, https://www.istockphoto. com/ ) * Media Trust India's low confidence in the media concerns its democracy. Rebuilding trust in the media is critical to an informed citizenry. * Youth Disconnect Reducing television watching among young people indicates a disconnect with traditional news media. Engaging and enlightening the younger generation through credible news sources is critical to their civic education. * Dependence on Algorithmic Feeds Users who rely on social media and search engines for news are exposed to

content created by algorithms, which might restrict access to important news Mobile News stories and other points of view. Consumption Patterns Check Your Progress: 7 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Enumerate the national and global challenges due to changes in news
consumption patterns.

5.9 FUTURE OF MOBILE NEWS AND ITS
IMPACT
Learners, based on what we have learnt in this unit, what do you think can be the future of mobile news? Is it all just likes and shares, or can it be something more? Well, the truth is that we hold the power to shape the future of mobile news. Moreover, there are difficulties involved. It may be difficult to distinguish fact from fiction, and fake news spreads like wildfire. However, do not be frightened, as we can appropriately navigate this exciting new world. The following can be considered to envision a way further. Let us start by talking about media literacy. Awareness of biases and news sources and recognition of false information are crucial in the present digital age. By developing these critical thinking abilities, one can recognise a dubious narrative at a distance and become resistant to clickbait. Consider it a superpower one can gain in the present. However, we are not alone in this war. 'Collaboration' is essential! Imagine a society where fact-checkers, governmental organisations, and social media companies unite to combat false information. Imagine a battle room humming with activity as people dispel myths and ensure the truth wins. By working together, we can create a more positive online space where knowledge is used for the benefit rather than as a tool for manipulation. Also, India should look at the prospect of passing laws like those in Australia, which require internet platforms to compensate regional media outfits for using their content. Besides guaranteeing content producers receive fair remuneration and inspiring them to produce real and original material, this can assist in bolstering the flagging news sector. Learners, remember that the future of mobile news is subject to change. Our responsibility is to mould it, encourage media literacy, build teamwork, and ensure that excellent journalism is fairly compensated. By doing these things, we may pave the way for a day when mobile news engages and informs us, allows us to participate actively in society, and ultimately aids in creating a better world.

5.10 LET US SUM UP
Learners, let us sum up what we have learned in this unit on Mobile News Consumption. Firstly, we discussed the idea of news for citizens and consumers. In doing so, we differentiated between the two concepts of Citizen and Consumer. While the citizen is a political entity, the consumer is an economic entity guided by market forces. Further, we discussed different theories related to consumer preferences, which shape news content and its consumption. There were four theories we discussed altogether. The theories are the Scarcity Theory of Attention, the Theory of Social Currency, and the Theory of Social Presence. Selective exposure and Uses and Gratification Theory are other related theories that may be applied to understand the preferences of mobile news consumers. We further discussed the impact of consumer preferences on news production. In doing so, we discussed different factors that shape consumer news content. We also discussed the different media available for news production and dissemination. In doing so, we discussed the advantages of print, electronic and digital media. Further, we discussed the concept of snacking/ grazing on the news. The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to people absorbing the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. Further, we discussed the four Ps of mobile news consumption. These are Patterns, People, Place and Participation. We also discussed the key findings of the Digital News Report 2023 of Reuters Institute. This report talks about the patterns of news consumption in India and throughout the world. This report also dealt with the impact of Covid-19 on news consumption. We further discussed the national and global challenges due to changes in news consumption patterns. In doing so, we discussed Misinformation and fake news, Quality of Journalism,
Democracy and Polarization, Media Trust, Youth Disconnect and Dependence
on Algorithmic Feeds. Towards the end, the unit concluded with a discussion on the future of mobile news and its impact on people, society and democracy.
5.11 KEYWORDS
Mobile News Consumption: The consumption of news through the apps provided on mobile phones/ tablets. Snacking/Grazing: The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to the current practice of people absorbing the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. Clickbait: Something (such as a headline) designed to make readers want to click on a hyperlink, especially when the link leads to content of dubious value or interest. The main purpose of content (on the Internet) is to attract attention and encourage visitors to click on a link to a particular web page.

Citizens: Citizens are concerned with the common good and their obligations Mobile News to the state. Through their involvement in democracy, citizens have political Consumption Patterns agency. Consumers: Consumers are primarily motivated by personal demands and market pressures. Their choices give them market-driven agency.
5.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Barnett, S. (1992). New news heralds a new era. British Journalism Review,
3(4), 68-69. https://doi.org/10.1177/095647489200300417
2. Boczkowski, P., Mitchelstein, E., & Matassi, M. (2017). Incidental news:
How young people consume news on social media.
3. Franklin, B. (Ed.). (2007). Local Journalism and Local Media: Making the
Local News (2nd ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203969205
4. Huang, W., & Yan, J. (2012). Effects of visual salience on news attention in
mobile Internet. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 52(3), 90-98.5. Ohme, W., & Yuan, M. F. (2016). Eye-tracking web users' navigation
patterns on different page layouts: An attention scarcity perspective. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 88, 87-100
6. Mitchell, A., Rosenstiel, T., & Christian, L. (2012). Mobile devices and
news consumption: Some good signs for journalism. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center.
7. Molyneux, L. (2017). Mobile News Consumption: A habit of snacking.
Digital Journalism. 6.1-17.10.1080/21670811.2017.1334567.8. Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Eddy, K., Robertson, C. T., & Nielsen, R. K.
(2023). Digital News Report 2023, Reuters Institute. United Kingdom. Retrieved from https://policycommons.net/artifacts/4164711/digital_ news_report_2023/4973510/ CID: 20.500.12592/3sq026.9. Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kaloga, S., & Levy, M. (2015). Trends in social
and psychological factors in the consumption of news and public affairs content. Digital News Project.
10. Porter, E, 'Consumers and Citizens', The Consumer Citizen (New York,
2021; online edn, Oxford Academic, 17 Dec. 2020), https://doi.org/10.1093/ oso/9780197526781.003.0006
11. Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of
telecommunications, Wiley. ISBN: 0471015814.12. Salomon, G. (2008). No media is an island: Intermedia interdependency and
transfer learning. In I. Spector, M. C. Linn, & R. S. Clark (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational communication and technology (3rd ed., pp. 157-177). Routledge
13. Westlund, O. (2015). News consumption in an age of mobile media:
Patterns, people, place, and participation. Mobile Media & Communication.
3.10.1177/2050157914563369.

Mobile And Society * Wojciesiak, M., & Wen, J. (2018). News avoidance on digital news platforms: Effects of perceived bias and trust on news avoidance among young adults. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 95(1), 126- 142. * Wolf, C., & Schnauber, A. (2015). News consumption in the mobile era: The role of mobile devices and traditional journalism's content within the user's information repertoire. Digital Journalism, 3(5), 759-776.5. 13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Consumers are primarily motivated by personal demands and market
pressures, whereas citizens are concerned with the common good and their obligations to the state. While customers have market-driven agency through their choices, citizens have political agency through their involvement in democracy. Citizens, as news consumers, view information with a civic mindset, aiming to keep informed in order to participate actively in democratic processes. Their motives stem from a duty to contribute significantly to society, encouraging civic participation through voting and community involvement. In contrast, news consumers view information as a commodity, motivated by personal preferences or entertainment value. This thinking might result in more passive news consumption, giving sensationalism or validating pre-existing opinions precedence over civic duties. Citizens and consumers differ in how they produce news, with citizens contributing to public debate through community reporting, participatory journalism, and educated conversations. On the other hand, consumers indirectly shape news agendas through market- driven preferences based on entertainment value rather than public service. Citizens are required to assess sources and actively fact-check. Check Your Progress: 2
1. According to the social currency theory's fundamental tenets, users
appreciate material they can debate and share with others in their social networks, elevating their status and creating virtual communities. This inclination is a boon for platforms that profit from user-generated content and viral trends. Not only is information consumed in the flurry of mobile news consumption, but it is also shared, exchanged, and turned into social currency. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Broadcast media allows immediate access to breaking news and live
events, frequently reaching greater audiences simultaneously than internet channels. This is especially important in fast-changing events like natural catastrophes or major breaking news. Studies have shown that television remains the preferred news source during important events, proving its capacity to swiftly cut through the noise and reach huge audiences. 94 (Wojciesiak & Wen, 2018; Newman et al., 2015)

* Multimedia learning can boost knowledge retention and engagement, Mobile News underlining the benefits of broadcast media in presenting news effectively Consumption Patterns (Salomon, 2008). * Broadcast media can reach those with limited technology or live in places with inadequate internet access. This guarantees that everyone has the chance to keep informed, regardless of socio-economic status or technology literacy. According to the Pew Research Centre (2023), radio is an important news source for rural areas and elderly persons, demonstrating its sustained significance to many consumers. * Electronic media allows for preservation and on-demand access. Online news archives serve as an easily available library of past events, allowing readers to explore historical material, compare opinions on various issues, and trace the evolution of news articles over time. This makes examining facts easier, gaining a better knowledge of difficult situations, and conducting historical analyses. * Furthermore, electronic media may be an effective instrument for investigative journalism, offering venues for whistle-blowers, exposing injustices, and holding officials responsible. Furthermore, internet databases and transparency projects frequently provide individuals access to government papers and decision-making processes, encouraging public knowledge and civic involvement. Check Your Progress: 4
1. The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to people absorbing
the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. This behaviour resembles how someone would nibble on modest food throughout the day. Check Your Progress: 5
1. It is a portmanteau of the words 'producer' and 'user'.
Check Your Progress: 6
1. According to data, access to internet news dropped precipitously by 12%
in India from 2022 to 2023. Also, television watching has declined by 10%, particularly among younger and urban populations. Moreover, some of the decrease in news engagement can be attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic's waning impact once lockdown regulations were loosened in April 2022. Check Your Progress: 7
1. * Misinformation and Fake News
* Quality of Journalism * Democracy and Polarisation * Media Trust * Youth Disconnect * Dependence on Algorithmic Feeds

BLOCK 2
UNDERSTANDING
MOJO

BLOCK 2 INTRODUCTION:
UNDERSTANDING MOJO
In the previous Block, you were exposed to the communication angle of a mobile medium. Let's change the focus to using this handheld device as professional equipment to create meaningful and impactful news stories. Mojo or Mobile Journalism is economically viable for media institutions and individual users. You may not be a mere news consumer anymore; rather, you will enjoy being a news producer. That's the metamorphosis in which you will take a new role as a Prosumer. Though the concept of prosumer was floated many decades ago by Alvin Toffler (1980), however in real life, you will understand its meaning. This Block will take you through the basics of Mojo.
Unit 6: Landscape of Mobile Journalism, In today's ever-connected
world, smartphones have transformed from mere communication tools into indispensable assets for journalism. This Unit explores the multifaceted realm of mobile journalism, examining its structure and profound impact on news dissemination. As smartphones blur the boundaries between news consumers and creators, understanding the symbiotic relationship between users and their devices becomes paramount. From traditional news gathering to the rise of citizen journalism, this Unit navigates through the diverse landscapes of mobile journalism, illuminating emerging technologies, social media integration, and the evolving ecosystem of news production, thereby equipping students with the essential skills and insights to thrive in this dynamic field.
Unit 7: Mobile Multimedia Basics, In the digital age, the ubiquity of
smartphones and tablets has propelled mobile multimedia into the forefront of our daily lives, enabling seamless access to and creation of multimedia content anytime, anywhere. This Unit explores the multifaceted realm of mobile multimedia, including its fundamental components, applications, dynamics, architecture, and design. We will examine the intricate concepts of audio and video and the algorithms underpinning mobile multimedia. Additionally, we'll unravel the significance of graphics, image data analytics, and the role of colour in enhancing user experiences. Furthermore, this module will elucidate the symbiotic relationship between multimedia and cloud computing, culminating in a comprehensive understanding of how mobile multimedia reshapes communication, consumption, and creation paradigms in the digital landscape.
Unit 8: Introduction to Mobile Application, In the digital era, the prominence
of mobile devices as gateways to the Internet has spurred a revolution in how we interact with technology. This Unit serves as an exploration into the realm of mobile applications, addressing their evolution, structure, and impact on various domains. You will understand the considerations and challenges unique to mobile app development, comparing them with PC and web-based applications to discern their distinctive features. By tracing the evolutionary path of mobile-based apps and analysing emerging trends in the mobility space, you will understand the role of mobile applications in shaping user experiences and driving innovation across industries.

Unit 9: Apps for MoJo, delves into the transformative role of mobile technology
in journalism, exemplifying the shift towards Mobile Journalism (MoJo). From the conventional tools of DSLR cameras to the ubiquitous smartphone, journalists now wield a multitude of apps for capturing, editing, and disseminating news content. By exploring various app categories, including recording, editing, live streaming, social media, and augmented reality, students understand the diverse tools available for modern storytelling. This Unit not only equips students with practical skills in mobile journalism but also underscores the evolving nature of news production in the digital age.
Unit 10: Mobile Journalism Equipment, Mobile journalism, or Mojo, has
transformed news production by enabling journalists to create and share content swiftly using smartphones. This Unit explores the essential tools and techniques for effective Mojo practice, emphasising the shift from traditional bulky camera setups to lightweight mobile solutions. As we explore mobile devices, editing applications, live streaming, and advanced equipment, we aim to equip you with the skills needed to excel in the dynamic field of mobile journalism, where innovation and adaptability are paramount. Sometime back, scholars of digital media observed that the Internet is dead; probably, with the advent of Apps, it might be true in the sense that there are more customised ways of accessing and using online content through mobile Apps.

UNIT 6 LANDSCAPE OF MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 Journalism and Social Media
6.2.1 Web 2.0 As A Communication Strategy
6.3 What Is Mobile Journalism?
6.3.1 Traditional and Virtual News Gathering
6.4 Citizen Journalism: A Complete Diversity
6.5 Mobile Journalism Landscapes
6.6 Mobile Ecosystem
6.7 Analytics Behind Mobile Journalism
6.8 Social Networks for Journalistic Practices
6.9 Emerging Technologies in Mobile Journalism
6.10 Let Us Sum Up
6.11 Key Words
6.12 Further Readings
6.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
6.0 INTRODUCTION
Smartphones are everywhere--literally. Everyone owns a smartphone, from an ordinary person to someone with professional expertise. Owning a smartphone is not only an icon of luxury. Instead, it empowers them with confidence. A kind of confidence that they can express their opinions, be a voice for the voiceless, and so on. Thus, a symbiotic relationship develops between the user and the smartphone. This relationship is used for the right cause by spreading accurate and authentic information. However, it has shifted the paradigm in how we develop and consume information, particularly the type we call news. They are introducing the framework behind creating user-generated content (UGC), empowering citizens with digital skills that transform their alternative voice into a more mainstream form. Smartphones for a Journalist are like a portable newsroom. In the millennial era, there can be several occasions where breaking news has been flashed via a smartphone. Mobile Journalism helps tech-savvy reporters and citizens with a nose for news bridge their digital divide.

6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to: * Understand how mobile devices, social media platforms and apps are interlinked; * Making journalistic content more engaging and interactive; * Techniques behind producing news for social and interactive media; * Nuances on how successful news publishers have developed mobile and social media strategies; and * Learning key skills to launch and develop news websites, apps and social media outputs.
6.2 JOURNALISM AND SOCIAL MEDIA
As we all know, Journalism is the "activity of gathering, assessing, creating, and presenting news and information to a large diversified audience". Journalism has taken a new shape in this technological world because of the advent of the Internet and Social Media. So, what do the Internet and Social Media do to Journalism? The arrival of the Internet has profoundly transformed the landscape of journalism in numerous ways, revolutionising how news is produced, distributed, and consumed. For example, the Internet and Social media help in the immediate dissemination of news to a global audience, empowering individuals to become citizen journalists, eliminating the constraints of traditional media schedules, and enhancing storytelling by providing a richer and more immersive experience for the audience. About journalism, Social media facilitates reach, immediacy, and interactivity among varied users to gather information, connect with audiences, and disseminate news stories. Journalists use social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and others to report breaking news and events in real time in addition to the conventional radio, print, and broadcast news platforms. Social media journalism differs in its presentation ability from traditional means, as social media news is not just letters, words, and photos. Instead, it's amalgamated with visuals of choice mixed with varied typography and colours. This presentation has the innate ability to acquire the audience's attention perspective.
6.2.1 Web 2.0 as a Communication Strategy
Web 2.0 refers to the second generation of the World Wide Web. Web 2.0 offers a communication strategy within the Internet, heading from a static, one-way communication model to a more dynamic and interactive approach. Convergence is the key aspect of Web 2.0, with social media platforms being the key element. Web 2.0 encourages users to create and share content. These platforms often support various media formats by combining text, images, videos, and links in a single, integrated experience. Web 2.0 emphasises interactivity, enabling users to participate in discussions, provide feedback, and engage with content 102 in real-time.

With the broadening of Web 2.0, many users believe that social media is just Landscape of Mobile the connection platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram. Instead, it Journalism also includes collaborative projects, blogs, microblogs, content communities, virtual game worlds and virtual social worlds. As wide as the social media sphere, journalism exists on all platforms, with form, content, and presentation differences. Following are the key aspects of Journalism in the world of social media: * Dissemination of News: Social media, the Internet, and the era of technology & applications have become important gateways of news consumption and have profoundly given a new meaning to 'journalism'. The predominant characteristics of new media, like Interactivity, Digital, Hyperactivity, Simulation, etc., have given a new perspective to journalism with the main ideology of exchanging views and information. With the emphasis shifted from research and content to production and form, keeping in mind redefined authorship as audiences became partners in news making and presentation. * Citizen Journalism: Social media equips and builds up ordinary individuals to act as citizen journalists, reporting on events as they happen. Thus, it provides unique perspectives and contributes to a more diverse news landscape, dominating the news space on social media platforms. This attribute explains a tectonic shift in the dynamics of journalism by bringing about user-generated content (UGC) and the 'digital first' race, which indeed has a compulsion on reporters and journalists to be multi-skilled in using varied facets of technology and social media to their advantage at a broader pace. * Monetisation and Sustainability: Social media platforms offer opportunities for news organisations to provide news and information and aid them in monetising content through advertising, sponsored posts, and subscriptions. Using social media for advertising and revenue can create challenges for traditional business models, and there are concerns about the impact on the quality of journalism when driven by clicks and engagement metrics. * Accuracy and Fact-Checking: Accuracy and fact-checking are essential principles in journalism as they contribute to the credibility and trustworthiness of the news reported. With information overload, users tend to get misinformed and uninformed about information and facts. Therefore, it becomes necessary to fact-check information for its accuracy and authenticity. Social media is valuable for journalists to verify information and fact-check stories. Humans have the innate ability to communicate and socialise, and journalism through social media has increased the aspect of socialisation among journalists, who increasingly use this mode for developing professional contacts, beat reporting, and looking for new and unique stories. In modern newsrooms, social media is one of the decisive factors when choosing which information and news needs to be covered based on social media popularity and mass opinion.

Understanding Mojo It is worth noting that journalism through social media can be referred to as the "Fifth Estate of Democracy", which has surpassed immediacy, responsiveness, sharing information that is accurate and authentic, helpful in catching the social evil and serving justice with equality. With enormous advantages, limitations include social media journalism as propaganda, misinformation, fake news and deceit. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. State the parameters for journalism through social media.

2. Discuss the importance of essential principles behind journalism through
social media.

6.3 WHAT IS MOBILE JOURNALISM?
Mobile Journalism is the technological upliftment of information dissemination with the aid of technology, especially smartphones, the Internet and social media. Mobile journalism, commonly called " MoJo" (mobile journalism), is a form of journalism where journalists use mobile devices and technology for news gathering, content development and production. Mobile Journalism can also be called "on-the-moment Journalism". Using mobile technology for journalism is on trend now as it has easy production with state-of-the-art technological facilities. Mobile journalism has become an integral and inevitable part of the modern news landscape, enabling journalists to report quickly, efficiently, and in a multimedia-rich format with appropriate visuals to reach audiences of all levels. Thus, MoJo facilitates real-time content transmission from the field to newsrooms and audiences worldwide. In this techno-social world, nothing is possible without a smartphone; days without accessing social media are never in millennial history. A symbiotic relationship exists between communication and mobile technology, reflecting co-dependency with benefits. Through mobile journalism, it is easy to persuade people with wireless mobile computing, where everyday life demands and social interactions are mediated, thus being "a voice for the voiceless". Media scholar Sherry Turkle (2008) calls these mobile devices as virtual leashes that constrain and control us whereby "we are tethered to our 'always on/always on us' communication devices and the people and things we reach through them" (2008, 2)--thus fuelling creativity in news outlets for easy dissemination of information. Mobile Journalism is an 'add-on' to conventional journalism,

which enables social media users to create global online communities to share Landscape of Mobile information, facilitate relationship building, and democratise news content Journalism (Fig. 6.1). Fig. 6.1 Diagram showing mobile journalism content planning By Jools Oughtibridge / joolsoughtibridge.co.uk
6.3.1 Traditional and Virtual News Gathering
Traditional news-gathering events, like Electronic News Gathering (ENG) and Electronic Field Production (EFP), need the physical presence of crews, cameras & equipment on location. In contrast, virtual news gathering through MoJo needs a multi-skilled journalist who is well-versed in technological advancements with wide-spectrum Internet. MoJo is perhaps most associated with journalism video production. The journalist is popularly called a 'jack-of-all-trades' skilled in the once-distinct filming, sound recording and lighting techniques. MoJo can happen anywhere. Any reporter in the field can capture video footage, conduct interviews, and report on events virtually from any location. The footage can be edited and transmitted in real-time in the same location and shared with the newsroom or audience. Drones equipped with cameras can help capture aerial footage of locations and events, picture unique perspectives, and enhance the art of visual storytelling. Even if the reporter cannot reach the location due to some unavoidable disturbances, there are possibilities of remote coverage and remote interviewing through platforms like Zoom, Skype, or others, which allow real-time communication. Mobile journalism, in collaboration with Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), can help journalists and reporters create immersive virtual environments for news reporting. This technological advancement aids in 105

Understanding Mojo presenting stories in 3D or providing virtual tours of locations, which can transport audiences to remote or inaccessible locations. Mobile journalism encourages participatory journalism as traditional media does not monopolise news. Mobile journalists articulate their role within the broader journalistic field. According to the Pew Research Center's 2023 State of the News Media, nine in ten adults (93%) get at least some news online (either via mobile or desktop), and the online space has become a host for the digital homes of both legacy news outlets and new, "born on the web" news outlets (https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/fact-sheet/digital-news/) Mobile journalism is more accessible and cost-effective than traditional broadcast equipment. As it requires less specialised equipment, many journalists and news organisations find it easier to adopt mobile journalism. With a wide spectrum of advantages, MoJo also poses challenges, such as potential limitations in output quality, both audio and video, compared to professional output. Journalists must be multi-skilled, adapt to new workflows and ensure the security and integrity of their mobile reporting. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Elaborate on the state-of-the-art technological facilities behind mobile
technology.

2. Traditional News Gathering and Virtual News Gathering-Differentiate.

6.4 CITIZEN JOURNALISM: A COMPLETE
DIVERSITY
Mobile journalism is a specific form involving mobile devices, such as smartphones, tablets, etc., to capture, edit, and share news content. It involves professional and non-professional journalists using this platform as their primary reporting tool and technique. Citizen journalism refers to the general public's collection, dissemination, and analysis of news and information, often using online platforms and social media. It involves ordinary people sharing news as one of their responsibilities. Citizen journalism is a participatory medium, along with social media journalism, in which any user or individual can produce and disseminate information based on their personal belief or a story of his neighbourhood. This particular form of

journalism is facilitated by social media, in which the latter is an active voice Landscape of Mobile to the people. The public is now open to assessing and evaluating the news Journalism and adding more information to it or giving a different perspective to the same news. The predominant advantage of citizen journalism is being a voice for the underprivileged and the local communities and actively participating in the process of decision-making that brings out political and economic reforms. Like Mobile journalism, Citizen journalism has changed and morphed society and remains one of the vital parts of modern civil society. Citizen journalism gives each human being a chance to play an active role in society by being a voice for the voiceless across regions and communities. In today's age of technological advancements and digital disruption, the role of citizen journalism is indeed a crucial and more challenging one. Anyone looking forward to being a citizen journalist must follow the developments of events and happenings as they occur, or they can produce the news themselves. Furthermore, citizen journalism contributes to the variety and pluralism across media outlets. Generally, "laymen" citizens will not even think of journalism in times of crisis and share information. However, some citizens set themselves apart from the crowd by being involved with first-person reportage. They commonly use their mobile phones to capture a photo of the event, add information, create a video with appropriate visuals, and post a tweet or a caption describing their surroundings and experiences to inform and connect with other people. Citizens are always armed with smartphones for friendly connections and watching, capturing and sharing breaking news. These citizens are laymen and not journalists. However, they have a nose for news and can create news stories and share them online. In September 2013, there was widespread video footage of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, which gained instant global attention. Videos of people suffering from the weapons in Ghouta, Syria, were posted on YouTube and shared on social media, quickly garnering attention from viewers around the world and the mainstream media. Citizen journalism became universally accessible with enormous blogs and through social media platforms. Blogs are personal web pages where individuals communicate with a widespread audience through texts and other multimedia like audio, video and pictures. Blogs can also be journalism tools for sharing information, opinions, feelings, and other content. Twitter is a microblogging platform that allows people to share information in a real-time news feed by posting brief comments about their experiences and thoughts.
6.5 MOBILE JOURNALISM LANDSCAPES
With technological advancements, users depend on the World Wide Web (WWW) and the Internet for everything. Owing to this usage, there is a heightened website traffic, double last year's. Heightened web traffic needs devices with upgraded and more innovative technologies, with an ascending graph in ownership pacing reaching millions and billions. This mobile revolution has an enormous effect on the public and masses, giving unprecedented opportunities to develop closer customer relationships, particularly with those living in marginalised communities, to create and publish their voice on a global scale.

Understanding Mojo Digital platforms have changed how news is consumed, distributed and produced. Journalism has multiple roles: it monitors and curbs power, supports and creates public debate, and educates and entertains. News holds lots of goodness of public good serving a purpose beyond the immediate needs of advertisers and consumers, with monetisation through cross-subsidy in the form of advertising or, in some cases, government support. News producers make their content available to search engines and social media with little or no financial return. And to satisfy the workings of digital platforms, news producers create more dynamic and shareable content. 'The chief purpose of the "news" is to enable humanity to live successfully toward the future. In the digital platform era, journalism and news media have come under intense scrutiny. With the advent of digital platforms--including the invention of Google in 1998, Facebook in 2004, and Twitter in 2006--questions about the role and value of the news loom large. Thus, digital platforms have changed the news, and thus, the news landscape has shifted from normalcy. In digital journalism, news no longer originates just from a few mainstream media brands but comes from many small news sites and blogs. This makes for a noisy environment where we are constantly bombarded by information. To the same extent, definitions of news are becoming extremely broad, with extensive scope for the 'softest' of content. News media, when evaluated through the prism of technology, includes algorithms that cause a revolution in digitisation and digital platforms. Today's news consumer looks forward to news with the following capacities: * Citizens consuming more news more often * The biggest change in consumption is the switch to online. These capacities make news consumption interactive, enabling consumers to share, comment, and create content. One study reveals that incidental exposure to news is stronger on YouTube and Twitter than on Facebook, and concerns have been raised around the passive nature of such news consumption. Further, WhatsApp users are more than three times more likely to spread a particular news topic than Facebook users. Simply put, news consumption varies significantly from platform to platform, as does the mobile landscape. However, some users are not active and interactive, but the news finds them simply because of their flexibility. This access and convenience are a boon for news consumers, particularly since so much news content is 'free'. Mobile innovations also play a major role in determining the mobile journalism landscape, with iOS and Android dominating the market. * Apple is the maker of the iPhone (smartphone) and iPad (tablet computer), which run the iOS operating system. * Google started life as a website search engine. However, its mobile operating system, Android, interests us the most. * Facebook is by far the most important social media site for journalists.

It also owns the photo and video site Instagram and the messaging apps Landscape of Mobile
WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger. Journalism
* Amazon is not a smartphone player, but it has succeeded with Kindle Fire tablets and the Amazon Echo, which features the voice command system, Alexa. These tech giants dominate the lives of users with their dynamic and lively landscapes, which can allow users to create multimedia interactive journalism content for display on many of these devices and platforms. A plethora of mobile apps and tools have emerged to support mobile journalism. These include camera apps, video editing apps, audio recording tools, and social media apps for direct distribution. Apps like FiLMiC Pro, LumaFusion, and Adobe Premiere Rush are popular choices for mobile journalists. Again, compared to mobile behaviour on consumer devices, there arises a variegated sequence with smartphones always on the go, PCs during work hours, and tablets in Prime Time. The vertical video revolution has made some news outlets embrace a mobile-first approach, tailoring their content for consumption on mobile devices. This includes creating vertically oriented videos optimised for mobile viewing and interactive storytelling formats that cater to mobile audiences. The landscaping of mobile journalism always looks forward to encouraging innovation in storytelling techniques. Journalists experiment with new formats, such as 360-degree videos, augmented reality, and virtual reality, to enhance the audience's experience.
6.6 MOBILE ECOSYSTEM
The ecosystem of mobile journalism refers to the interconnected and dynamic elements that contribute to the practice and development of journalism using mobile devices. This ecosystem encompasses various components, including tools, platforms, skills, training, and the broader context in which mobile journalism operates. Smartphones and tablets are the primary tools in mobile journalism. These devices come equipped with high-quality cameras, audio recording capabilities, and a range of apps that support journalists in capturing, editing, and sharing news content. Social media plays a central role in the distribution of mobile journalism content. Platforms like Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, and YouTube allow journalists to share news updates, engage with audiences, and broadcast live events. Platforms that support live streaming, such as Facebook Live, YouTube Live, and Periscope, enable journalists to broadcast news events in real time, fostering immediacy and audience engagement. The ecosystem includes contributions from citizen journalists and the broader public who use mobile devices to capture and share news-related content. User- generated content adds diverse perspectives to news coverage. Traditional news organisations, as well as digital-first outlets, play a role in the mobile journalism ecosystem. Some outlets adopt a mobile-first approach, tailoring content for consumption on mobile devices.

Understanding Mojo Efficient Ecosystems also rely on the ability to report from virtually anywhere with a mobile signal, which contributes to the global nature of mobile journalism. Journalists can provide coverage in real-time from the field, reaching a wide audience. A culture of innovation and experimentation also marks mobile ecosystems. Journalists explore new formats, technologies, and storytelling techniques, such as augmented reality, virtual reality, and 360-degree videos. The ecosystem includes considerations of journalistic ethics in the context of mobile reporting. This involves navigating issues related to accuracy, privacy, and responsible use of mobile technology. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write notes on Citizen journalism and its importance in the present scenario

2. Discuss about the mobile ecosystem.

6.7 ANALYTICS BEHIND MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Analytics is interpreting data to gain insights, which helps make data- driven decisions. Leveraging metrics and analytics is important to sustain competitiveness in the data-driven market. What is Analytics? What are Metrics? As more people consume news and information on their mobile devices, journalists and news organisations evaluate analytics to understand better how their audience interacts with content. Mobile analytics in journalism refers to using data and insights from mobile devices to inform editorial decisions, understand audience behaviour, and optimise content delivery. Metrics are quantitative indicators that will judge your presence and performance on social media. Metrics involve certain parameters, like reach (how many people see your content), engagement (how many people interact with your content), traffic (how many people visit your website or other platforms from your social media posts), conversions (how many people take a desired action), and reputation (how people perceive your brand). Various tools and platforms can be used to collect and analyse these metrics, like Google Analytics, Facebook Insights, Twitter Analytics, Instagram Insights, or Hootsuite.

Analytics involves tracking, reviewing, and reporting data to measure web Landscape of Mobile activity and performance, as well as background study of the website and its Journalism components, like webpages, images, and videos. The data collected through web analytics may include SEO, traffic sources, referring sites, page views, paths taken and conversion rates. Apart from this, several other aspects determine the mobile analytics in journalism: * User Engagement Analysis: This analysis involves tracking parameters, including page views, time spent on articles, and the number of shares on mobile platforms. Judging user engagement allows journalists to design audience-centred conceptual content. * Platform-Specific Analytics: These analytics mostly deal with user behaviour, which helps collect platform-specific data and tailor content for each platform. Owing to this, the technological app interface on various mobile platforms like iOS and Android has changed. Along with operating systems, the impact of various mobile devices and screen sizes differs based on user experience. * Audience Analytics involves evaluating the mobile audience based on demographics, location, and other relevant factors. This helps the creator customise content better to suit the preferences and needs of different audience segments. * Mobile Content Analytics: Analysing data to identify high-performing content on mobile devices can guide editorial decisions on the types of stories to focus on. Including visual content and different multimedia elements (images, videos) helps in mobile engagement. * Performance Analytics: Monitoring the performance of mobile apps and websites is much needed for better web page performance. It identifies and addresses issues like slow loading times, mobile-friendly designs and multimedia layouts for better readability on smaller screens. That may affect the user experience. * Notifications and Alerts Analytics: Tracking the effectiveness of push notifications and alerts amidst web traffic is essential for heightened user experience. This analysis also includes responding to breaking news notifications and adjusting strategies accordingly. It helps to understand the impact of social shares on mobile traffic and optimise content for sharing on popular mobile-friendly social media platforms. * Monetisation Analytics: Analysing monetisation to understand the effectiveness of advertising and monetisation strategies on mobile platforms helps optimise ad placements and formats for better user engagement. "Buzzfeed Journalism" or "clickbait journalism," often referred to as "buzzworthy content", focuses on creating attention-grabbing, shareable, and often sensational content designed to generate high levels of engagement, clicks, and social media shares. Buzzworthy journalism often prioritises virality over traditional journalistic values, aiming to quickly capture the audience's attention. Analysing this content can help effectively drive traffic and web and audience engagement. Buzzworthy journalism includes:

Understanding Mojo * Create attention-grabbing headlines that are concept-oriented, exaggerated, or provocative and designed to attract curiosity and encourage clicks. * Listicles, an amalgamation of 'List' and 'Article', are a popular content format across social media platforms that displays information in a list- based structure accompanied by engaging visuals and abridged content. * Countdowns, otherwise referred to as Countdown timers, help social media users engage effectively. They invoke desire and prompt them to take action. Countdown timers in social media posts or ads generate excitement about upcoming news breakouts, promotions, etc. * Clickbait or eye-catching thumbnails or images entice users to click on the content; these thumbnails can misinform and disinform citizens and are sometimes misleading, creating fake content. * Buzzworthy journalism often includes interactive elements like quizzes or polls to encourage user participation and sharing. * Emotionally charged content acts as icons of attraction and is crafted to evoke strong emotions, whether positive (awe, joy) or negative (outrage, shock), as emotionally charged content tends to be more shareable on social media platforms, with prominent share buttons and social media- friendly formats. * Buzzworthy content frequently centres around celebrities, pop culture, and trending topics to capitalise on existing interests. Content tends to be concise and easily digestible, catering to short attention spans prevalent in social media audiences. * Buzzfeed journalism often participates in or creates viral challenges and trends to stay relevant and engage with a wider audience. * Encouraging user participation by soliciting comments, opinions, or submissions can enhance engagement and extend the reach of the content. * Quick response to emerging trends, memes, and online phenomena helps keep the content timely and in tune with the latest internet culture. * Controversial topics or click-worthy debates are highlighted to attract attention and spark user discussions. Journalists need to adapt to social media's changing landscape while maintaining ethical standards and ensuring the accuracy of information. Each social network serves a unique purpose, and journalists often use a combination of these platforms to connect with their audience and share impactful stories.
6.8 SOCIAL NETWORKS FOR JOURNALISTIC
PRACTICES
Social networks play a crucial role in modern journalistic practices, offering journalists new avenues for information gathering, audience engagement, and content distribution. Here are some prominent social networks that journalists often utilise: * Twitter: A microblogging platform widely used for real-time news

updates, Twitter is valuable for breaking news and staying updated on Landscape of Mobile current events. Most journalists use Twitter to share content, engage with Journalism followers, and follow influential industry figures. * Facebook: Facebook serves as a platform for distributing long-form content, building a community around a news outlet, and reaching a diverse audience. Groups and Pages on Facebook can help journalists connect with specific communities and share content tailored to their interests. * LinkedIn: Journalists use LinkedIn to connect with sources, experts, and other professionals and value its networking capabilities. It's a platform for sharing in-depth analyses and opinion pieces and building a professional online presence. * Instagram: A social media platform that initially started as influential, Instagram has developed to be an ideal platform for visual storytelling. Journalists use Instagram to share behind-the-scenes content, photo essays, and engaging visuals. IGTV and Stories offer additional formats for sharing news content in a visually appealing manner. * YouTube: Journalists use YouTube to share video content, including documentaries, interviews, and news reports. Live streaming on YouTube allows for real-time engagement with the audience during events or breaking news situations. * Reddit: Reddit is a platform for community-driven discussions. Journalists use it to discover niche communities related to specific topics and engage with knowledgeable individuals. It's a valuable resource for finding unique perspectives and stories. * WhatsApp: Journalists use WhatsApp to connect with sources, gather information, and communicate with audiences. WhatsApp groups can be formed to create a community interested in specific topics. * Signal: For secure communication, Signal is a preferred messaging app among journalists who deal with sensitive information and protect sources. Its emphasis on privacy makes it suitable for confidential conversations. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write notes on Mobile Analytics in Journalism

2. Discuss clickbait and its need in fact-checking.

6.9 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Emerging technologies continue to shape the landscape of mobile journalism, providing journalists with new tools and capabilities. As technology advances, mobile journalism is expected to benefit from innovations that empower journalists to create compelling and timely content with increased efficiency and accessibility. * 5G Technology: 5G networks enhance mobile connectivity, allowing journalists to upload and stream high-quality content more efficiently. Faster data speeds facilitate real-time reporting, live streaming, and high- definition video transmission. * Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR): AR and VR technologies enable immersive storytelling experiences through mobile devices. Journalists can use AR to overlay information onto the real world, enhancing the audience's understanding of a story. VR allows for 360-degree video reporting, bringing viewers directly into the news environment. * Artificial Intelligence: Artificial Intelligence is integrated into mobile journalism for news reading, content creation, and content development. Transcription services, language translation, voice recognition, etc. Automated video editing tools powered by AI can assist journalists in producing content with specifications. * Blockchain Technology: Blockchain technology is being explored to verify the authenticity of mobile-generated content, which helps reduce piracy, increase transparency, connect artists directly with fans, and verify the scarcity of digital collectables.
6.10 LET US SUM UP
Let us sum up the major points we discussed is this unit: * Smartphones are everywhere--literally. In the millennial era, breaking news can be flashed via a smartphone on several occasions. * Mobile Journalism helps tech-savvy reporters and citizens with a nose for news bridge their digital divide. * The arrival of the Internet has profoundly transformed the landscape of journalism in numerous ways, revolutionising how news is produced, distributed, and consumed. * Mobile journalism, in collaboration with Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), can help journalists and reporters create immersive virtual environments for news reporting. * Citizen journalism is a participatory medium, along with social media journalism, in which any user or individual can produce and disseminate information based on their personal belief or a story of his neighbourhood.

* In digital journalism, news no longer originates just from a few Landscape of Mobile mainstream media brands but comes from many small news sites and Journalism blogs. * The ecosystem of mobile journalism refers to the interconnected and dynamic elements that contribute to the practice and development of journalism using mobile devices. * Analytics is interpreting data to gain insights, which helps make data- driven decisions. Leveraging metrics and analytics is important to sustain competitiveness in the data-driven market. * Emerging technologies continue to shape the landscape of mobile journalism, providing journalists with new tools and capabilities.
6.11 KEYWORDS
User-generated content (UGC) refers to any content--whether text, images, videos, or other forms--created and contributed by non-professional users. Augmented reality (AR): Augmented Reality (AR) is a technology that superimposes computer-generated information, such as images, sounds, or other data, onto a user's real-world view. Virtual reality (VR): Virtual Reality (VR) is a computer-generated simulation of a three-dimensional environment that can be interacted by creating a sense of presence in the virtual space Drone Camera: A drone camera is integrated into a drone, allowing the unmanned aerial vehicle to capture photos and videos from various altitudes and angles. Artificial Intelligence: Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the simulation of human intelligence in machines programmed to think, learn, and perform tasks that typically require human intelligence. Blockchain Technology: Blockchain technology is a decentralised and distributed ledger system that enables secure and transparent record-keeping of transactions across a network of computers.
6.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Hill, S., & Bradshaw, P. (2018). Mobile-First Journalism: Producing
News for Social and Interactive Media (1st ed.). Routledge.
2. Kuyucu, M. (2020). Social Media and Journalism. In book: Academic
Studies In Social Science (ed) Hasan Babacan & Meric Erarslan &
Abidin Temizer. Montenegro: IVP
3. Wilding, D., Fray, P., Molitorisz, S. & McKewon, E. (2018). The impact
of digital platforms on news and journalistic content. University of Technology Sydney, NSW.

6.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Parameters for journalism through social media include reach, immediacy,
and interactivity among varied users to gather information, connect with audiences, and disseminate news stories.
2. Accuracy and fact-checking are essential principles in journalism,
contributing to the credibility and trustworthiness of the news reported. With information overload, users tend to become misinformed and disinformed about information and facts. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The state-of-the-art technological facilities behind mobile technology
include AR, VR and Drone Journalism.
2. Traditional news-gathering events, like Electronic News Gathering (ENG)
and Electronic Field Production (EFP), require a multi-skilled journalist, whereas virtual news gathering through MoJo requires a journalist. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Citizen journalism is a participatory medium, along with social media
journalism, in which any user or individual can produce and disseminate information based on their personal belief or a story of his neighbourhood.
2. The ecosystem of mobile journalism refers to the interconnected and
dynamic elements that contribute to the practice and development of journalism using mobile devices. This ecosystem encompasses various components, including tools, platforms, skills, training, and the broader context in which mobile journalism operates. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Other aspects that determine mobile analytics in journalism include user
engagement analytics, platform-specific analytics, audience analytics, mobile content analytics, performance analytics, notifications and alerts analytics and monetisation analytics.
2. Clickbait or eye-catching thumbnails or images entice users to click on the
content; these thumbnails can misinform and disinform citizens and are sometimes misleading, creating fake content.

UNIT 7 MOBILE MULTIMEDIA BASICS
Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 What is Multimedia?
7.2.1 Components of Multimedia
7.3 Mobile Multimedia
7.3.1 Mobile Multimedia Applications
7.3.2 Mobile Multimedia Dynamics
7.3.3 Mobile Multimedia: Architecture & Design
7.3.4 Mobile Multimedia: Audio & Video Concepts
7.3.5 Mobile Multimedia Algorithm
7.4 Graphics & Image Data Analytics
7.4.1 Graphic Formats
7.4.2 Image Data Analytics
7.5 Importance of Colour in Mobile Multimedia
7.6 Multimedia Information Sharing and Retrieval
7.7 Cloud Computing and Multimedia
7.8 Let Us Sum Up
7.9 Key Words
7.10 Further Readings
7.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
With the widespread adoption of smartphones and tablets, mobile multimedia has become everywhere, allowing users to access and create multimedia content anytime, anywhere. Mobile devices, particularly smartphones and tablets, have become integral parts of our daily lives, acting as powerful hubs for multimedia consumption, creation, and communication. Multimedia is the field that deals with the combination of text, graphics, drawings, still and moving images (Video), animation, audio, and any other related media that is arranged, processed, and transmitted digitally. Mobile multimedia helps satisfy user experiences by being a communication vehicle and determines how we consume information. The main capacity of mobile multimedia is its capacity to integrate not only various forms of media, such as text, images, audio, and video, into a single interactive platform but also includes visual information with brilliant graphics, interactive videos, and immersive audio giving a user engagement with a dynamic and engaging environment for users. 117

7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to: * Critically understand how mobile multimedia can be leveraged in educational contexts; * Learn how to use audio and multimedia tools to make a product that is more engaging and interactive; * Techniques behind producing multimedia information with visually appealing graphics for interactive media; and * They are learning key skills for integrating mobile technology into content development and satisfying social media algorithm expectations.
7.2 WHAT IS MULTIMEDIA?
As the name suggests, ' multi' comprises several different, independent elements integrated for better consumption. If the elements include text, graphics, audio, video, animation, etc., for media users to navigate, interact, create, and communicate, it is essentially called Multimedia. Multimedia is a representation of information keeping in mind both attractive and interactive features of the particular creation with the use of a Multimedia is thus developed to be a basic skill that is essential for communication, which satisfies the objective of the same as reading. Multimedia is giving a new meaning to the nature of reading itself. Instead of limiting the users to the linear presentation of text as printed in books, multimedia makes presentation and reading dynamic by giving words a new dimension through visual typography. A multimedia document in any form of a book can have related information through inter-connected links, thus letting a user navigate the universe of connected information at just a click of a button. This unique capacity of the Internet in the form of multimedia makes the network an Information Superhighway. Multimedia is a powerful tool because researchers opine that users on any platform, for that matter, can retain only 20% of what they see and 30% of what they hear. But they remember 50% of what they see and hear and almost 80% of what they see, hear, and do simultaneously. That is why multimedia provides such a powerful tool for information sharing, redefining the communication system that forms a significant part of our society's infrastructure. In the technological world, the Internet competes with television for people's free time. A Nielsen study reported that Internet users spend more time online than TV. The Internet is a worldwide connection, popularly called the World Wide Web, with more than 72 million computers that use the Internet Protocol (IP) to communicate and share information. Activity 1 Think of an example of an advertisement that is power-packed with visuals. What was the advertisement? What multimedia graphics were used? Did you 118 learn better because of the multimedia? Why or why not?

7.2.1 Components of Multimedia Mobile Multimedia
Basics Multimedia is a multi-faceted form of communication which combines various graphical elements to create meaning. Understanding these components is essential for anyone exploring the diverse and interconnected world of multimedia creation and consumption. * Text: Text is the foundational element that conveys information through written or typed characters. Texts are usually used with other media types to enhance comprehension and communication. Leading and kerning are essential elements of text orientation in multimedia. Typography involves the art and technique of arranging type to make written language legible, readable, and visually appealing. Typography helps establish a clear visual hierarchy within multimedia content. Typefaces, font sizes, line weights, and typeface styles guide the viewer's attention, emphasising key messages or important information. * Graphics: Graphics refer to visual elements such as images, illustrations and diagrams created, designed, or generated to convey information, enhance understanding, or evoke specific emotions. In digital and visual communication, graphics encompass various visual representations, including illustrations, photographs, charts, diagrams, icons, and other visual elements. Images included in graphics include bitmap, clip art or Vector images. Bitmap, otherwise called raster images, consists of pixels, which are small blocks of colour. Vector images include geometric images, including lines, shapes, dots, curves, etc. * Audio: Audio includes sound effects and elements like music and narration. It enhances the sensory experience, adding depth and emotion to multimedia presentations. * Video: A video is a sequence of moving images that underlies a storyline and conveys dynamic information. It encompasses a narrative and visual context, making multimedia more engaging. * Other Elements: Besides these multimedia elements, some other components allow user engagement, such as clickable buttons, hyperlinks, and interactive simulations. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Define Multimedia and its importance in social media.

2. Discuss the importance of multimedia components.

7.3 MOBILE MULTIMEDIA
Multimedia plays a crucial role in elevating user experiences to new heights in mobile devices. Integrating multimedia components enhances how users interact with their devices, fostering a more immersive and enjoyable environment. Mobile multimedia enriches user experiences through many technological innovations, like Augmented reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR). Virtual reality, or VR, is a technological convergence combined with creative invention in multimedia. Goggles, helmets, special gloves, and bizarre human interfaces attempt to place you "inside" a lifelike experience. VR is an extension of multimedia; it uses the basic multimedia elements of imagery, sound, and animation. The advent of 5G technology has significantly impacted mobile multimedia capabilities. With faster data speeds, lower latency, and increased network capacity, 5G facilitates seamless streaming of high-definition videos and real- time multimedia applications.
7.3.1 Mobile Multimedia Applications
One of the predominant applications of Mobile Multimedia in entertainment and Gaming. The entertainment landscape has transformed with the advent of OTT platforms, from streaming services and mobile games to interactive storytelling apps. Platforms like Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hulu, and Disney Hotstar have become synonymous with mobile entertainment. High-quality video streaming, personalised recommendations, and original content have reshaped how users consume movies and TV shows on their mobile devices. The mobile gaming industry has witnessed an unimaginable revolution. From casual games to complex, immersive experiences, mobile devices are now powerful gaming platforms. Augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) technologies further enhance gaming experiences, blurring the lines between the virtual and real worlds.
7.3.2 Mobile Multimedia Dynamics
The dynamics of Mobile Multimedia involve interactive storytelling, which combines multimedia elements with narratives. Social media users can actively participate in stories, making decisions that shape the plot and creating a personalised and engaging entertainment experience. The social media interface involves a multimedia-rich ecosystem, wherein visuals, audio, video, and animation have created seamless integration and shared moments with visually appealing content. User-generated content: Social media platforms sustain and generate 120 the content and news feeds users develop. User-generated content (UGC)

includes any form of content users create, including text, images, videos, and Mobile Multimedia multimedia. This content represents individuals' collective creativity, opinions, Basics and contributions within online communities and is crucial in shaping the digital landscape. Digital First: Digital-first is aligning content strategies with the evolving digital landscape. "Digital-First" refers to a strategic approach where digital platforms and technologies take part in the planning, creating, and distributing of content. This gives a tremendous shift from traditional, offline methods to online and digital channels, acknowledging the transformative impact of technology on audience engagement and content consumption. Real-time Engagement: Real-time engagement involves Live streaming, interactive features, and audience participation through comments, polls, and Q&A sessions. This content-delivering strategy fosters a sense of immediacy and community engagement, enhancing the user experience and building a more authentic connection between content creators and their audience. Activity 2: Analyse the interfaces of gaming platforms for their visual appeal & design. This will be an eye-opener for the next chapter.
7.3.3 Mobile Multimedia: Architecture & Design
Mobile multimedia architecture involves a combination of hardware and software components that enable the creation, storage, transmission, and consumption of multimedia content on mobile devices. Mobile devices serve as the primary endpoints for multimedia consumption. Mobile multimedia design has to be designed in such a way that it manifests the company's vision to other consumers. Making the interface visually pleasing with designs that adhere to the core marketing objectives & strategies and utilising the medium for the betterment of the organisation for which it is created. What makes up Mobile Design? There are six elements in Mobile Design: 1. Context 2. Message / Branding 3. Look and Feel 4. Layout 5. Colour
6. Typography 7. Graphics
7.3.4 Mobile Multimedia: Audio & Video Concepts
Mobile multimedia enriches users' experiences; with the upcoming digital media revolution, the necessity of converting analogue audio into digital format arises through sampling. Audio for generating content must undergo audio compression techniques (e.g., MP3, AAC) for efficient storage and transmission on mobile devices. Social media interfaces have been designed with audio enhancement technologies that modify the audio frequency and equalise it for usage in the platform with in-built audio cancellation. Most gaming and interface devices use InApp Sound design. Regarding video technologies, resolution and aspect ratio vary with social media interfaces, and frame rates and colour representation vary based on platforms. Advancements in technology ensure smooth video accuracy and the ability to stream and cast the video to external displays. 121

Understanding Mojo Exploration of upgraded audio and video codecs in the realm of mobile multimedia, advanced digital audio representation, video compression, playback technologies, and synchronisation as per various social media platforms is vital for developers, content creators, and users, which aim to leverage the full potential of audio and video in the mobile environment.
7.3.5 Mobile Multimedia Algorithm
Social media platforms' interfaces have been designed with built-in algorithms, which play a pivotal role in enabling efficient processing, compression, and enhancement of audio and video content across social media platforms. Audio Compression Algorithms include AAC (Advanced Audio Codec), MP3 (MPEG Audio Layer III, and Opus with adaptive noise cancellation and spectral subtraction. Image and Video enhancement algorithms help enhance the resolution and quality of images and videos, mainly concerning Color Correction and Grading and techniques for balancing the brightness and contrast in videos for better visibility. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Elaborate on the enriching user experiences in Mobile multimedia.

2. Elaborate on Mobile Multimedia Design & Algorithm.

7.4 GRAPHICS & IMAGE DATA ANALYTICS
Graphics and image data analytics play a pivotal role in shaping the visual experiences on mobile devices. The predominant aspect of Graphics and image data analytics is Image data representation, which involves popular image formats like JPEG, PNG, WebP, and HEIF. Image compression is performed using wavelet transforms. Complex statistical data are transformed into visually comprehensible graphics, often called Infographics. As the name suggests, infographics are nothing but information in graphical format. Images used on social media platforms are mostly geotagged to maintain accuracy and authenticity when debunking information. Activity 3 Create a design and make it multifaceted for compatibility across platforms.
122 This will help students understand the aspect ratios and colour schemes across
platforms.

7.4.1 Graphic Formats Mobile Multimedia
Basics Graphic formats are the various file formats used to store and represent graphic or image data. Visual information is encoded, compressed, and stored, influencing factors such as image quality, file size, and compatibility with various applications and devices that are compatible with the platform's significance. Different graphic formats are suitable for specific use cases, and the choice of format depends on factors like the type of image, intended purpose, and desired level of compression. Following are some common graphic formats:
1. GIF (Graphics Interchange Format): GIF is used for simple web graphics
with limited colours. These GIF files are the smallest of the four because they are always reduced to 256 colours, making for fast-loading visuals. GIF is not advisable for files with many colours, like photographs or other detailed imagery. It works best for small graphics like banners, charts and buttons.
2. PNG (Portable Network Graphic): PNG can be used for a small resolution
that maintains its original quality. PNG files support millions of colours, plus varying degrees of transparency -- so they are perfect for graphic image files, like logos and infographics.
3. JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group): JPEG is the format for
online photos. It supports a full spectrum of colours, and almost all devices and programs can open and save to the JPEG format -- making it the most universal of the four.
4. TIFF (Tagged Image File Format): TIFF is best for any bitmap images
you intend to edit. TIFF does not compress to make for smaller files because they are meant to preserve quality. TIFF files offer options to use tags, layers, and transparency and are compatible with photo manipulation programs like Photoshop.
7.4.2 Image Data Analytics
Image data analytics is closely associated with computer vision, a field of artificial intelligence that enables machines to interpret and understand visual information based on user activity across platforms. Analysing image data on social media platforms helps assess the ability and performance of visual content. Metrics such as likes, shares, comments, and click-through rates on images provide valuable insights into audience preferences and behaviour. Image data analytics can be used to identify visual trends and patterns. Staying attuned to these trends enables marketers to create content that aligns with current aesthetics, ensuring relevance and engagement. Images are usually a point of attraction to assess the effectiveness of collaborations and maintain visual content management. It also includes parametrisation based on aspects like sentiment analysis based on visual content, image tagging, and content recommendation. Understanding user preferences through image data analytics enables the production of personalised content and improves brand and marketing strategy. Platforms can use this information to tailor the user experience,

Understanding Mojo providing content that aligns with individual interests. These analytics can help manage risks associated with particular content and identify and mitigate risks associated with inappropriate or harmful content. Automated systems can detect and flag images that violate community guidelines or brand safety standards.
7.5 IMPORTANCE OF COLOR IN MOBILE
MULTIMEDIA
Colour is an important component of any multimedia creation, as it can influence user experience, emotional responses, and the overall visual appeal of content. Colours, apart from their representation, represent emotional association and cultural significance. Each colour, though it denotes a meaning co, connotes a meaning that can be used as an element in mobile multimedia--colour schemes, like complementary, analogous, and monochromatic, help create harmony for multimedia creation. Colours used in multimedia creations can enhance narrative elements and evoke specific moods in multimedia content. Understanding the emotional connotations of warm colours (e.g., red, orange) and cool colours (e.g., blue, green) with the intensity of colours can evoke different emotional responses. For example, warm colours like red and orange may convey excitement or energy, while cool colours like blue and green can evoke calmness or serenity. Using colour strategically allows multimedia creators to influence the audience's emotional response. Colour adds visual and aesthetic appeal to any visual with the prime aim of attracting interest. It sets the tone of the genre in which it is created, thus creating a visually engaging experience for sharing information and setting up the marketing strategy. These meanings of colour can vary across different cultures, examining cultural preferences and their impact on mobile multimedia design. With the upcoming data-driven journalism practices, colour plays a major role in sharing information and organising content. Colours also play a vital role in differentiating and interpreting information in data visualisation methods like graphical representations, pictorial charts, flow charts, etc. Colour plays an important role in establishing brand identity. Most companies associate a particular colour palette to reinforce brand recognition across social media platforms. Even media companies associate themselves with a particular colour palette, making it instantly recognisable to audiences. In multimedia and digital storytelling, colour can be used as characterisation parameters and convey narrative elements within the storyline, giving importance to or highlighting important aspects of a story or creating a specific creative realm or social media atmosphere. Filmmakers, graphic designers, and other multimedia creators use colour to enhance their storytelling experience. Important elements or calls to action can be highlighted with contrasting or vibrant colours, guiding the viewer's eyes to specific areas of interest.

Check Your Progress: 3 Mobile Multimedia
Basics Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Analyse the importance of graphical formats in mobile multimedia.

2. Elaborate on the use of colours in mobile multimedia.

7.6 MULTIMEDIA INFORMATION SHARING
AND RETRIEVAL
The prime motivation behind developing next-generation computer and communications networks is universal access to multimedia information. Furthermore, products are being developed to extend the capabilities in all existing network connections to support multimedia traffic. The rapid evolution of these networks has come about because of new technological advances, heightened public expectations, and lucrative entrepreneurial opportunities. Multimedia, which includes data, voice, graphics, still images, audio, and video, requires network support to transmit multiple media. The media to be transmitted, often called sources, are represented in digital form, and the networks used to transmit the digital source representations may be classified as digital communications networks, even though analogue modulation is often used for free-space propagation or multiplexing advantages. Multimedia engages users more effectively than content with only texts. The multimedia element gives its users an appealing gesture through its visuals and typography, which leads to increased attention, understanding, and retention of information. The visual and interactivity aspect of multimedia makes the shared content more interactive and simulated. Multimedia information sharing involves exchanging and disseminating information incorporating various media elements. It facilitates communication, collaboration, and the distribution of knowledge in a richer and more engaging format. Any information for multimedia operations across mobile platforms utilises adaptive streaming technologies to deliver multimedia content based on varying network conditions and device capabilities. Compression techniques reduce file sizes and ensure faster content loading on mobile devices without compromising quality with a wide range of devices and platforms. Common formats include MP4 for videos and JPEG or WebP for images. 125

Understanding Mojo These multimedia information creations are usually stored in cloud-based storage solutions, enabling seamless retrieval of multimedia content stored across various devices. This allows users to access their media libraries regardless of their device.
7.7 CLOUD COMPUTING AND MULTIMEDIA
As mentioned, cloud-based storage allows users to access multimedia information across devices with a broadband Internet facility. Cloud storage and retrieval ensure seamless accessibility across multimedia devices like a computer, tablet, or mobile phone. These multimedia creations stored in the cloud can be accessed across different operating systems and devices, providing a consistent experience for users regardless of the platform they are using. Popular cloud-based storage solutions that support multimedia content include Google Drive, Dropbox, Microsoft OneDrive, and Amazon S3. Users wishing to share these multimedia creations can share links to specific files or folders for easy collaboration and content sharing across platforms. Some platforms even support real-time collaboration on documents or multimedia projects, thus providing compatibility across platforms. So, what is Cloud storage? What is the technology behind that? Cloud computing is the current buzzword in the Information Technology (IT) industry. It involves accessing on-demand computing resources via the Internet, such as software, storage, and even infrastructure. Cloud computing has existed in concept for nearly 50 years; however, only recently has technology progressed to the point where it has become a multi- billion dollar annual industry. In simpler terms, cloud computing can be defined as Emailing information to yourself from the office and then retrieving and using that information at home. A simple explanation for cloud computing would be storing data and information away from our physical location, not on local hard disks or servers. Access is obtained via the Internet when the need arises to use that data or reference that information. Since access to that data and information is via the Internet, it is available from anywhere via the Internet. Access to data and information is not confined to any location, which is the essence of cloud computing. "Clouds are a large pool of easily usable and accessible virtualised resources (such as hardware, development platforms and/or services). These resources can be dynamically reconfigured to adjust to a variable load (scale), allowing also for an optimum resource utilisation. This pool of resources is typically exploited by a pay-per-use model in which guarantees are offered by the Infrastructure Provider by means of customised SLA [Service Level Agreement]". Clouds can be seen somewhere in the sky whenever we look up, regardless of physical location. Whenever we connect to the Internet, data and information are available regardless of physical location. There are claims of technical reasons behind the name. Network configuration diagrams show connections 126 to the Internet away from the local area network (LAN) and virtual private

network (VPN) connections with a fluffy cloud symbol, as in Figure 7.1. Any Mobile Multimedia organisation or institution that uses an Internet application can claim to be Basics computing in the cloud. Network users have been connecting to network servers for all the needed services. Cloud computing connects all services to the Internet [cloud] instead of connecting them to the network servers. All services are available wherever we are, as long as there is a connection to the Internet. With such portability and flexibility in the computing environment, businesses can reach their customers 24/7 anywhere in the world. Students can study online courses from anywhere in the world. Individuals can socialise on the Internet and Skype and do whatever they want, from wherever they are and whenever they want.
Fig 7.1: Representation of Cloud Computing
Cloud computing services are responsible for maintaining and updating the underlying infrastructure. This relieves users from the burden of managing storage and helps creators to concentrate on creating and managing multimedia content. There are a lot of cloud service providers who help to protect stored multimedia data with proper encryption, access controls, and regular security audits. Cloud computing services integrate storing, retrieving, and processing multimedia files, providing a more cohesive and efficient user experience. Cloud computing follows a pay-as-you-go model, allowing users to pay only for the storage and resources they consume. This eliminates the need for organisations to invest in and maintain expensive local storage infrastructure, leading to cost savings. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write notes on Multimedia Information Sharing

Understanding Mojo 2. Discuss about cloud computing and its importance in technological existence.

7.8 LET US SUM UP
Let us sum up the major points we discussed is this unit: * Multimedia is the field that deals with the combination of text, graphics, drawings, still and moving images (Video), animation, audio, and any other related media that is arranged, processed, and transmitted digitally. * Mobile multimedia helps satisfy user experiences by being a communication vehicle and determines how we consume information. * Multimedia is a multi-faceted form of communication which combines various graphical elements to create meaning. * Multimedia information sharing and retrieval in the mobile landscape are dynamic processes influenced by technological advancements, user behaviours, and ethical considerations.
7.9 KEYWORDS
Multimedia is a multi-faceted form of communication that combines various graphical elements to create meaning. Clickable buttons are interactive elements commonly used in user interfaces to trigger actions or navigate within a system or application. Hyperlinks: Hyperlinks, often referred to simply as links, are elements in digital content that allow users to navigate from one location to another within the same document or to external resources on the Internet. Interactive simulations refer to computer-based models or representations allowing users to engage with and manipulate system elements actively. Branding: Branding is a strategic process and a set of activities that involves creating a unique and memorable identity for a product, service, company, or individual. Typography: Typography is the art and technique of arranging and designing text to make written language legible, readable, and visually appealing. It encompasses various elements such as typefaces, fonts, line spacing, letter spacing, and overall text layout. Resolution is the number of pixels (individual points of colour) on a display monitor, expressed as the number of pixels on the horizontal and vertical axes. Infographics, as the name suggests, are nothing but information in a graphical 128 format.

Mobile Multimedia
7.10 FURTHER READINGS
Basics
1. Gibson, J. D. (2001). Multimedia Communications: Directions and
Innovations. A volume in Communications, Networking and Multimedia. Academic Press.
2. Sloane, A. (1996). Multimedia Communication. McGraw Hill.
7.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Multimedia integrates different media forms, such as text, graphics,
audio, video, and interactive elements, to create a cohesive and dynamic communication experience. It involves using various media types to convey information, entertain, and engage an audience, often leveraging the strengths of each medium to enhance overall communication effectiveness.
2. In social media, Multimedia plays a pivotal role in shaping user experiences,
driving engagement, and compellingly conveying messages. Here's why multimedia is crucial in the context of social media. Multimedia components, encompassing text, graphics, audio, video, and interactive elements, are essential in various domains because they enhance communication, engagement, and overall user experiences. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Mobile multimedia enriches user experiences through technological
innovations, such as augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR).
2. Mobile multimedia design has to manifest the company's vision to other
consumers. Social media platform interfaces have been designed with built- in algorithms, which play a pivotal role in enabling efficient processing, compression, and enhancement of audio and video content across social media platforms. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Graphical formats play a crucial role in mobile multimedia due to their
impact on user experience, content presentation, and overall engagement. Graphical formats, such as images, videos, and animations, enhance the visual appeal of mobile applications and content. Visually attractive interfaces capture users' attention and encourage engagement. High-quality graphics create a positive first impression, making users more likely to explore the app or multimedia content.
2. Colour is not merely a visual element but a powerful tool that shapes the
user experience and communicates emotions and information in mobile multimedia. As mobile technologies advance, understanding the nuances of colour in mobile multimedia will remain crucial for designers, developers, and content creators seeking to captivate audiences and convey compelling narratives.

Understanding Mojo Check Your Progress: 4
1. Multimedia information sharing and retrieval in the mobile landscape
are dynamic processes influenced by technological advancements, user behaviours, and ethical considerations. As mobile multimedia continues to evolve, addressing challenges and prioritising user experience and privacy will be essential for creating robust and responsible multimedia sharing and retrieval ecosystems.
2. In simpler terms, cloud computing can be defined as Emailing information
to yourself from the office and then retrieving and using that information at home. Cloud computing refers to delivering services over the Internet, including storage, processing power, networking, databases, and more. Instead of relying on local servers or personal devices for computing resources, users can access and use these services through remote servers hosted by cloud service providers. Cloud computing offers a scalable and on-demand model, allowing users to pay for only the resources they consume.

UNIT 8 INTRODUCTION TO MOBILE
APPLICATIONS
Structure
8.1 Introduction
8.2 Learning Outcomes
8.3 Considerations and Challenges for Mobile App
8.4 PC Based Applications
8.5 Web Based Applications
8.5.1 Presentation Layer
8.5.2 Web Content Management Layer
8.5.3 E-commerce Layer
8.5.4 Integration Layer/Services Layer
8.5.5 Security Layer
8.6 Evolution of Mobile-Based Applications
8.7 Comparison of Mobile Apps with Web Applications
8.8 Content and Protocol in Mobility
8.9 Trends in Mobility Space
8.10 A Brief Note on Mobile App Platforms
8.11 Let Us Sum Up
8.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.13 Further Readings
8.1 INTRODUCTION
As we have witnessed a revolution in the consumer space toward mobility, most analysts have identified that mobile devices are the major gateways to the Internet compared to desktop browsers. Mobile devices are replacing all traditional channels to access information. To align with this trend, enterprises, too, are designing digital applications to cater to a wide array of mobile devices and platforms. Mobile application development involves developing applications for mobile devices such as Personal Digital Assistants (PDA), tablets, smartphones, and others. Native mobile apps are designed to run on a specific mobile platform, sometimes a specific mobile operating system, and supported hardware. Mobile applications are part of the mainstream digital strategy for business- to-consumer (B2C) enterprises. Most enterprises are now adopting a "mobile- first" strategy, wherein digital applications are designed, developed, and tested

Understanding Mojo for mobile devices; mobile users attain the primary focus of the digital strategy. Disruption in the mobility space has a major impact on enterprises' revenues. Mobile apps are shaping user experiences, providing real-time information, and offering more engaging experiences for users. Mobility-based digital strategy considers various things such as user experience, performance, interactivity, device form factors, device limitations, location needs and personalization.
Key Drivers for Mobile Applications
The following are the key drivers of mobile apps: * Innovations in the mobile space, such as the proliferation of smartphones and the higher bandwidths offered by 3G (Third generation) and 4G (Fourth generation) technologies, are coupled with higher capacity storage technologies with higher speed chips, which will continue to power mobile devices. * Consumer behaviour: Customers are more used to mobile devices, and it is easy to access information on the move. * Personalised content delivery: The enterprise can leverage location and sensors to offer more contextualised, relevant, personalised content, offers, and advertisements. * Mobile ecosystem: An explosive growth in mobile application stores such as Apple, Google Play, and Windows marketplace stores was coupled with the availability of games, utilities, and other apps. * Social Networking: With the popularity of Web 2.0 and social media technologies such as Facebook and Twitter, users increasingly use location-based features in social media platforms. Impact of Mobile Apps on various domains Mobile apps are impacting various industry verticals and functional domains. Given below are high-level changes enabled by mobile apps across industries: * Retail and Consumer Packaged Goods (CPG) Industry: Mobile apps provide location-based store locator, targeted promotions/offers/ coupons, service reminders, mobile bidding, in-store tools, cross-sell/ upsell and comparator tools. Mobile apps are key in driving traffic and increasing sales and brand loyalty. On the B2B front, mobile apps have redefined lead management, CRM functions, efficient tracking, field force automation, etc. Mobile apps have also improved in-store merchandise, supply chain and inventory management. * Banking industry: Mobile apps enable convenient ways to carry out transactions such as account balance, payment, localised alerts, tap- to-pay, branch locator, and payment coupons. They would also enable mobile banking and wallets and provide "on-the-go" features. * Logistics: Mobile apps make tracking shipments, getting updates, and 132 managing the warehouse and fleet easier.

* Healthcare: Mobile apps can connect patients, doctors, and insurance Introduction to
Mobile Apps
providers and provide wellness management solutions. Besides the enterprise scenarios mentioned above, mobile apps have revolutionised the consumer space, with various apps related to gaming, utilities, social media, video streaming, and more.
Attributes of Mobile Applications
The following are the key attributes of mobile applications: * Ubiquity: Mobile applications are always available and connected and enable users to access information anytime, anywhere * User-friendliness: Mobile applications provide responsive and interactive user interfaces with essential information. They utilise the camera, sensors, media output, and touch/multi-touch/voice interface to provide simplified actionable information. * Location awareness: Mobile applications use the Global Positioning System (GPS) and other sensors to provide location-sensitive information. * Minimalistic: The content and features in mobile apps are minimal, which is essential for the functionality.
8.2 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After readings this unit, you should be able to: * Understand key concepts of mobile app development; * Know the opportunities and challenges of mobile apps; * Know the details of PC-based apps as well as web-based apps; * Know the content and key protocols of mobile apps; * Know the evolution of mobile apps; and * Comparison of mobile apps and web apps and upcoming trends in the mobility space.
8.3 CONSIDERATIONS AND CHALLENGES
FOR MOBILE APP
The main considerations for mobile apps are given in Figure 8.1 Figure 8.1: Mobile App Considerations 133

Understanding Mojo The main considerations for mobile app design are listed below: * The intended utility of the mobile app * Consumer engagement with richer user experience * Productivity through efficient flows * Driving incremental revenue through user stickiness * Customer conversion * User loyalty through targeted and personalised offers * App Architecture * Native vs hybrid vs web-based on the requirements * Middleware requirement for centralised configuration * Offline vs online capability for storing data * App Development Principles * User experience through richer controls and interactive components * Compatibility on various devices and platforms * Performance for each screen and task * Security for data * Productivity enhancement tools * Target users * Consumers for B2C apps * Business for Business to Business (B2B) apps * Partners for B2B apps * Employees for Business to Employee (B2E) apps * Testing * Device testing * Performance testing * Various testing scenarios The main challenges in mobile app strategy are given below: * Diversity of devices and heterogeneous technologies: Various mobile platforms and devices exist. The app should provide an optimal experience in all scenarios. * Security: The mobile app should ensure data security during transmission and storage. * User experience: The mobile app should provide optimal user experience by leveraging the device's capabilities to provide the highest engagement possible.

* Network: Mobile apps should be designed to work in regions with Introduction to network, latency and bandwidth challenges. Mobile Apps * Compliance with diverse standards, OS, mobile platforms and devices.
8.4 PC BASED APPLICATIONS
Personal Computer (PC)- based applications are software programs developed to run on specific operating systems and hardware platforms. These pioneer applications were used during the initial days of software development. There are two main types of PC-based applications: stand-alone and client-server.
8.4.1 Stand-alone PC Applications
Stand-alone PC applications are independent software programs that run on an OS. These applications do not typically use network resources or support multi-user mode. Utility programs such as word processors, calculators, and media players fall into this category. Each application had a good user interface for the PC user to interact.
8.4.2 Client Server Applications
In client-server applications, each terminal PC has client software connected to a centralized server software. The client program gets input from the end user and submits the details to the server software through a dedicated session established through the network. These applications were also referred to as "thick clients." Database software, networked games, banking software, and a network file system are some examples of this category of applications. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. is an attribute related to mobile app availability.
2. are independent software programs which
would run on an OS. Table: 3. and, are two key components of client-server applications.
4. The main target users for mobile apps are
Table: 5. Native vs hybrid is related to, consideration.
8.5 WEB-BASED APPLICATIONS
Internet-enabled applications mainly rendered on desktop browsers are categorised as web applications. Most modern web applications follow a layered Model-View-Controller (MVC) architecture, which supports loose coupling and flexible modular components.

Understanding Mojo A typical MVC-based web application is depicted in Figure 8.2:
Fig. 8.2: MVC Web Application
The key layers of the MVC framework are shown below: * Presentation layer (View layer): User experience components such as portlets, widgets, pages, User Interface (UI) modules, buttons, and forms are present in this layer. Modern web applications normally use JavaScript components to build the UI modules. The UI modules will mainly render the view portion of the application. View components communicate with the back end through services. Modern web applications use Representational State Transfer (REST) based lightweight services. * Business layer: This layer comprises components that implement business logic and rules. It mainly consists of a rules engine, search, business objects, workflows, business process management (BPM), caching frameworks, and other entities. All business modules expose services to the presentation layer. * Data layer (model layer): This layer mainly consists of persistence handling components such as database access components, Data access objects (DAO), query components, and Object-Rational Mapping (ORM) frameworks. Besides these layers, we also have security components (responsible for authentication and authorization) in the security layer and utility components to handle cross-cutting concerns. Figure 8.3 depicts a complex n-tier enterprise web application. It shows various layers for enterprise search, content management, and e-commerce with various enterprise interfaces.

Introduction to
Mobile Apps
Fig. 8.3: N-tier Enterprise Web Application
The multi-layered architecture is mainly based on MVC architecture:
8.5.1 Presentation Layer
This involves the presentation components like portlets and other user experience components. Key components are explained below: * Personalization: Role-based access and other fine-grained access control to provide personalised user experience. * Widgets: Wherever required, jQuery-based client-side widgets would be developed to provide client-side functionalities. This would help enhance the overall user experience and improve the page performance. Real-time report data display/refresh, pagination, and search functionality are typical scenarios where this AJAX-based feature can be employed. * Multi-device support: Responsive design and device recognition features will be leveraged to cater to various mobile devices. * Page layouts: Flexible page layout to cater to various web pages. * Information architecture and navigation models: This consists of context menus, bread crumbs, left navigation, site map, and site hierarchy for the website.
8.5.2 Web Content Management Layer
The web content management layer consists of the following modules: 137

Understanding Mojo * Content authoring using authoring templates. * Content tagging with relevant metadata and tags. * Content publishing to various targets and in various formats. * Asset management of various digital assets, documents and multimedia files. * Workflow for managing the content approval, publishing and update processes.
8.5.3 E-commerce Layer
E-commerce modules usually consist of modules related to catalogue management, order management, modules for shopping carts, promotion, cross-sell and up-sell, and product information management.
8.5.4 Integration Layer/Services Layer
The solutions use a business service layer for integration with external systems. The integration strategy is based on Service Bus Architecture, in which the middleware can act as a service bus linking multiple applications that require services of each other through a central service layer. The service bus becomes a point of data interchange and manages the communication with each peripheral application independently. All service invocations will be done through the ESB layer. JMS component will be developed to send and receive the messages to the ESB message destination. Application/System services will be developed and exposed to the ESB layer.
8.5.5 Security Layer
The security layer consists of authentication, authorization and single sign-on modules.
8.6 EVOLUTION OF MOBILE-BASED
APPLICATIONS
A brief overview of various stages of mobile app development is depicted in Figure 8.4.138 Fig. 8.4: Evolution of mobile app

The core features of the various stages of mobile app evolution are detailed Introduction to below: Mobile Apps * Embedded systems: We have embedded systems such as calculators on various devices in this category. These systems have limited functionality. * Device-specific apps: Applications specific to a device are part of this category. For instance, device-specific games and other utility apps fall into this category. * OS-specific apps: Operating system-specific apps such as games and media players fall into this category. * Cloud-based apps: In this category, we have always available cloud- based apps.
8.7 COMPARISON OF MOBILE APPS WITH
WEB APPLICATIONS
A high-level comparison of mobile apps with web applications is given in the following table 8.1:
Table 8.1: Mobile App Vs Web Application
Criteria Web Application Mobile App
User experience Provides a good experience Mobile apps can leverage full device optimised for desktop capabilities and offer a rich experience browsers. to users. Mobile apps provide a rich branding experience to users. Performance Web applications provide Native mobile apps provide high good performance based on performance. performance optimizations. Location Web applications provide Mobile apps provide location-sensitive awareness relatively less location- and contextual information awareness Development We can have a single code We need multiple code bases to cost base and lower development support various mobile platforms, and maintenance costs. resulting in higher maintenance costs. Access Desktop browsers and mobile mainly access web applications. mechanism browsers Mobile browsers and mobile devices access mobile apps. User Web applications use a Mobile apps provide intuitive features intuitive limited amount of device using the device's camera, sensors, features features. GPS, etc. and provide notifications to users. Interactivity Web applications provide Mobile apps offer high-level interactive interfaces through interactivity through a touch interface. widgets.

Criteria Web Application Mobile App
Applicability Web applications are Gaming, location-specific applications normally used as Information such as car rental, store locator, and display platforms reporting apps. Personalization Web applications Mobile apps provide a high degree offer personalization of personalization through various features through server-side context parameters such as location, preferences. history, etc. Common use News, blogs. Games, social media and location- cases related services.
8.8 CONTENT AND PROTOCOL IN MOBILITY
The content for mobile apps is designed to be adaptive. Adaptive content uses rules to adapt itself based on the context. Context includes parameters such as device, location, time, form factor, mobile platform, screen resolution, personalization parameters, preferences, etc. Hence, adaptive content provides a superior information delivery experience for mobile users. Let us look at a couple of examples of adaptive content in the context of mobile apps. We would have a long and short product description for a regular product page. If the product content is designed to be adaptive, the long description would be rendered on desktop browsers and tables with higher page real estate, and only short descriptions would be delivered on smartphones with lesser screen layouts. Similarly, role-based content filtering and location--and time- based content filtering can be done using adaptive rules. Responsive design mainly accommodates flexible page layouts and screens. A responsive page design and adaptive content combination would be ideal for mobile scenarios. The main protocols used in mobile apps are as follows; * Wireless Application Protocol (WAP): It provides specifications and rules for wireless communication devices like smartphones. WAP is optimised for low-memory, low-bandwidth mobile devices. * Representational State Transfer (REST): Responsive mobile web applications communicate with servers using lightweight REST calls. Normally, JSON data is used in REST services for data exchange.
8.9 TRENDS IN MOBILITY SPACE
The following are some of the trends in the mobility space: * HTML 5-based responsive apps: HTML 5 technologies would help developers develop responsive web applications catering to all mobile devices. * Bring your device (BYOD): Employees can bring their own mobile devices to work and work simplification.

* Internet of Things (IoT): Provides real-time data through sensors Introduction to and other connected devices to the mobile. Wearables are increasingly Mobile Apps gaining traction, and mobile devices will consume the data published from wearables. * Mobile device management (MDM): Managing various device configurations, security, and policies. * Mobile application management (MAM): Managing version, delivery and provision of various apps. * There has been an increased variety of communications, such as touch, voice, facial/gesture recognition, video, scanning, and near-field communications. * Location-based real-time alerts and notifications and other innovative features such as route optimization. * Mobility as a service (MaaS): MaaS is to accelerate time to market and reduce complexity.
8.10 BRIEF NOTE ON MOBILE APP
PLATFORMS
Let us look at two popular mobile app development platforms: iOS and Android. Android Android is an open-source mobile development platform based on Java and maintained by Google. The key features supported by Android are SQLite- based lightweight storage, SMS and MMS messaging, multi-lingual support, and mobile browsers. Other key features are multi-touch support, multi- tasking, voice features, external storage, etc. Android development needs an Android SDK, libraries, emulator and Eclipse IDE. Testing can be done using Android testing APIs. We can deploy Android apps to the Google Play store. Apple iOS iOS is the mobile OS for Apple devices. The development on iOS happens using Objective C. iOS supports many features such as iMessage, iCloud, Siri, etc. iOS provides in-built apps such as mail, notifications, contacts calendar, bookmarks, sync, etc. iOS development includes iOS SDK (XCode), iOS Simulator, XCode IDE, and other frameworks for building iOS apps. For mobile web development, we could use numerous JavaScript frameworks such as SenchaTouch, jQuery Mobile, jQTouch and software such as PhoneGap that are used for mobile web development.

Understanding Mojo Check Your Progress: 2
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) The layer is responsible for presentation
components in MVC architecture.
2) The layer is concerned with centralised service
access.
3) Lightweight service invocation in mobile apps can be done through
4) .is a popular open-source mobile platform.
8.11 LET US USM UP
This unit discussed the main considerations and challenges in mobile app development. We then discussed PC-based applications, including stand-alone and client-server applications. We then had a detailed discussion of web-based applications designed using MVC architecture. We also looked at various stages of mobile app development. We compared mobile apps with web applications and looked at mobile apps' content and protocols. We summarised brief trends and an overview of key mobile platforms.
8.12 FURTHER READINGS
References * https://developer.apple.com/ * http://developer.android.com/ * https://play.google.com * http://phonegap.com/ * http://jquerymobile.com/ * http://www.sencha.com/ * http://www.wirelessweek.com/articles/2011/03/15-trends-matter * http://www.wirelessweek.com/articles/2009/11/innovation-fragmentation * http://www.androidauthority.com/android-vs-blackberry-pros-and-cons- 31084/ * http://bgr.com/2013/09/19/mobile-app-store-downloads-102- billion-2013/ * http://www.wired.com/images_blogs/gadgetlab/2010/04/android-os- marketshare2.jpg * http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23946013 * http://www.webpronews.com/ios-android-app-store-android-market- millennial-media-mobile-mi-2011-04

Introduction to
8.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Mobile Apps
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1) Ubiquity.
2) Stand-alone PC applications
3) Client terminal and Server software
4) Consumers, businesses and employees
5) App Architecture
Check Your Progress: 2
1) View layer
2) Integration/services layer
3) REST calls
4) Android

UNIT 9 APPS FOR MOJO
Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Capture and Recording Apps
9.3 Editing and Post-Production Apps
9.4 Live Streaming Apps
9.5 Social Media and Content Distribution Apps
9.6 Note-Taking and Organization Apps
9.7 Collaboration and Communication Apps
9.8 Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) Apps
9.9 Location and Navigation Apps
9.10 Security and Encryption Apps
9.11 Let Us Sum Up
9.12 Keywords
9.13 Further Readings
9.14 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
Smith (2019), a journalism student in her blog post, writes about the shift in journalism training she encountered during her journalism studies. As an undergraduate student, she was required to have a DSLR camera and voice recorder, which was mandated by her school for photojournalism, multimedia and news writing. By the time she joined the graduate school a couple of years later, she was only required to have an iPhone for everything. In a matter of a few years, profound changes in news technology have majorly affected the field of journalism. She adds that with these technological changes, all journalists are now gatekeepers and have in their pockets the tech needed to record, photograph, film, write, edit, polish, and publish a multimedia news piece. She feels this brings a new meaning to "freedom of the press". Mobile Journalism, or MoJo's mainstay, is mobile phones and the tools that power them for news stories. Many apps provide the power to record interviews, photograph and film people and events, and write, edit, and publish multimedia news. Today, regardless of whether one's phone is running Android or iOS, many 144 apps are available for MoJo. For the convenience of students, apps have been

broadly classified under various categories. These categories are not watertight, Apps for Mojo and apps can be used cross-category. Besides the listed categories, there are miscellaneous apps for audio recording and editing, interview and transcription, translation, and many other functions a journalist requires daily for a news story.
9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After readings this unit, you should be able to: * Learn about the various types of mobile apps available for recording, photographing, filming, writing, editing, and publishing multimedia news pieces; * Learn about mobile apps that help provide collaboration and communication, location and navigation, and security and encryption; and * Learn about apps at the cutting edge of technology, i.e. Augmented Reality (AR).
9.2 CAPTURE AND RECORDING APPS
Fox (2021), writing for "Lifewire," lists the eight best recording apps for iPhone and Android phones. He notes that with the improvements in mobile camera technology, the average smartphone matches the standalone digital cameras. The top three, according to his list, are: Filmic: A USA-based company acquired in 2022 by Italy-based Bending Spoons, is the number 1 recording app. Fox feels it had the best interface among available options, a full range of professional features and output comparable with pro-grade camcorders. The app is available for both Android and iPhone. Also, the app brings features from professional video cameras like zebra stripes from exposure warnings, focus peaking, and log gamma curve recording, plus manual controls for most functions. Not only does it support various file format options, but it also has professional audio quality with granular control and advanced tools. It is a paid product and offers in-app purchases for many professional features. Screenshot of the Filmic Pro website https://www.filmicpro.com/

Understanding Mojo MAVIS: This iOS-only app is free but has extra features bundled with a cost. As per Fox, this app has professional features and the broadest audio recording options. Its shooting assistant options include zebra bars, false colour for exposure, and focus peaking. It also includes selectable bitrates and embedded time codes for video files. Some photographers prefer this over Filmic. Screenshot of the MAVIS website https://www.shootmavis.com/ MoviePro is an iOS-only app with a lower price and fewer options than Filmic. According to Fox, the app offers manual controls for nearly all features and a range of video recording options. It also offers flexible audio recording, monitoring, and a Bluetooth microphone input option. Screenshot of the MoviePro website https://www.moviepro.app/ Fox recommends the other recording apps: Open Camera (https://opencamera. sourceforge.io/), an Android app; Camera MX (https://www.magix.com/us/ apps/cameramx/), an Android app; ProMovie Recorder (https://promovieapp. com/), an iOS app; Videoshop Video Editor (https://videoshop.net/), an iOS and Android app; and LumaFusion (https://luma-touch.com/lumafusion-for-ios/), an iOS app.

There are a lot of capture apps for creating new content for social and other Apps for Mojo channels. Read (2022), head of content at Buffer Inc. has a list of apps, some of which are: MuseCam is an iOS app that helps users shoot and edit photos with professional camera features like presents, manual camera controls, and HSL (hue, saturation, lightness). # Screenshot of MuseCam website https://musecam.co/ VSCO (formerly VSCO Cam) is a free and paid app for iOS and Android that enables users to capture, edit, share, and discover photos. It offers many high- quality filters and a host of free editing tools, such as fade, clarity, skin tone, tint, sharpen, saturation, temperature, etc., with the option of manual adjustment. # Screenshot of VSCO website https://www.vsco.co/ Halide Mark II for iPhone and iPad enhances the mobile photo experience. Screenshot of Halide website https://halide.cam/

Understanding Mojo Besides the above apps Read lists out "Manual" for iOS (http://shootmanual. co/); "Camera +" for iOS (http://camera.plus); "Camera FV-5" for Android (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flavionet.android. camera.lite) and "Spark Camera" an iOS app to capture photos and video in full 1080p HD for Instagram Stories and Instagram Reels.
9.3 EDITING AND POST-PRODUCTION APPS
Grannel (2023), writing in "Techradar", lists his top 6 apps for best video editing, which can be used by all types of users, including the ones promoting their business on social media platforms like Instagram, Facebook, and TikTok. He writes that mobile video editing apps today come with various tools and effects and have become easier to use, even for beginners. His top picks are based on the user interface, editing experience, platform availability, performance and pricing, and they are: Power Director 365: An Android and iOS app from Cyberlink, it has a free and paid version that unlocks all features. It is at the top of Grannel's list because of its simplicity, with easy import, edit, and export video functionality. Screenshot of the Power Director 365 website https://www.cyberlink.com/ products/powerdirector-video-editing-software/overview_en_IN.html?r=1 Adobe Premiere Rush is a beginner's app for iOS and Android from Adobe. As per Grannel, the app is capable and has a standardised interface across platforms. However, it requires a Creative Cloud subscription from Adobe and is less feature-packed than the Premium Pro version.

Screenshot of the Adobe website https://www.adobe.com/products/premiere- rush.html LumaFusion is an iOS, iPad, and Android app that, according to Grannel, has an easy interface, additional tools, and professional editing functions and doesn't require a subscription. The app is equivalent to desktop video editing software and feels complicated to an average user. It has a multi-track editor for video and audio, overlaid effects, music, and voice-over features. The app can even work with footage shot in 4K. Screenshot of LumaFusion website https://luma-touch.com/

Understanding Mojo Some of the other editing apps recommended by Grannel are "DaVinci Resolve" (https://www.blackmagicdesign.com/products/davinciresolve) a free app for iPad; "KineMaster" (https://www.kinemaster.com/en) for Android, iOS and iPad which needs a subscription for unlocking some tools and "Apple iMovie" (https://apps.apple.com/us/app/imovie/id377298193) a free app for iOS, iPad and macOS.
9.4 LIVE STREAMING APPS
Duhamel (2023) writes about the best live-streaming apps for mobile broadcasting. She adds that there are various aspects of the everyday world that people would want to watch on video, too, while it is lifestreaming in real-time, as the experience of watching in real-time makes for better viewing and better news value. Hence, live streaming videos have become an essential part of content strategy for many businesses, including the news business. The apps she selected allow one to easily share and promote content even while recording and storing it for future use. The main features of live streaming apps are Adaptive Bitrate Streaming, TML5 video player, multi-bitrate Streaming or Transco ding, LS protocol, and RTMP. Other features that need to be considered are Mobile support, overall design, video quality, video effects and customisation, comments and sharing, and Multistreaming. According to Duhamel, some of the best liver streaming apps are: Larix Broadcaster is a free app available for iOS and Android. It offers a wide range of features, including screencasting, which helps record one's screen for live streaming. Other features include RTMP and RTSP publishing, streams to multiple services like YouTube Live and Twitch, and Adaptive Bitrate Streaming. Screenshot of Larix Broadcaster website https://softvelum.com/larix/ nanoStream: Paid app for both iOS and Android platforms, has extremely low latency even to large audiences and offers multi streams. Gamers, auctioneers, e-learners, and software developers are the segments that use this app.

Screenshot of nanoStream website https://www.nanocosmos.de/v6/index.html Wirecast Go: This is the mobile app version of Wirecast, a live-streaming software platform that works only on iPhones. Its key features include broadcasting in portrait or landscape mode, switching between multiple prepared shots, adding logos and branding to a live stream, and capturing and replaying live broadcast highlights. Screenshot of Wirecast Go website https://www.telestream.net/wirecast-go/ overview.htm There are other apps besides the above three, some of them being: "AIRMIX" for iOS live streaming (https://teradek.com/pages/airmix); "BroadcastMe" for both iOS and Android (https://www.streamaxia.com/); "YouNow" for both iOS and Android (https://www.younow.com/explore) etc. Besides the specialised live streaming app, social media platforms allow live streaming. Examples include YouTube, with a massive user base on which one can stream either using a desktop or mobile with or without streaming software (also called an encoder); Facebook Live allows one to go live if one already has an audience on the platform directly from a mobile on desktop; Instagram Live has become a popular choice for mobile live streaming with the option of integrating an Instagram account with a Facebook profile or page so that one's live stream will also appear on Facebook; Twitch a very popular sites for live streaming mainly focused on gaming and tech and TikTok a short-form video sharing app.

Understanding Mojo Check Your Progress: 1
Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Give examples of editing and post-production apps with examples of
features which make them equivalent to standalone digital cameras.

2. What are some of the essential features of a live streaming app for MoJo's?
Give some examples of live-streaming apps.

9.5 SOCIAL MEDIA AND CONTENT
DISTRIBUTION APPS
Wilpert (2023), writing on content distribution platforms, divides them into three subsections: niche Media Platforms, Social Media Platforms, and Paid Media Platforms. He further divides these platforms into free and paid. Under niche media platforms, Wilpert lists apps like "Quuu Promote" (https:// quuu.co/ ), which lets one select the most relevant category for a piece of content and promote that content via people who have signed up to share content in that category with the Quuu app; "Slofile" (https://slofile.com/) which lists public Slack group across all different niches and allows one to participate in the group discussion and "HARO" (https://www.helpareporter.com/) which connects journalists seeking expertise to include in their content with sources who have that expertise. In addition to the above apps, he lists apps like Product Hunt, Triberr Promote, BuySellAds, Buzzfeed Advertise, and Facebook Groups, where disparate virtual groups are formed to collect and share content. Most of the above platforms, except Facebook groups, are not commonly heard in India. Screenshot of the Buzzfeed website https://advertise.buzzfeed.com/

Screenshot of the HARO website https://www.helpareporter.com/ Social Media Platforms which run on both iOS and Android are more familiar to students; for example, Instagram a photo and video-sharing social networking platform, Snapchat a multimedia messaging app, Pinterest that uses images to discover new content on the Internet and popular for sharing recipes, home ideas, travel ideas, style inspiration, and more, YouTube a video sharing app, Facebook lets people connect with friends, family, and other people one knows, LinkedIn a professional networking platform, Reddit a discussion app, Twitter (now X) a microblogging and news sharing app etc. Then there are paid media platforms like Google Ads, where one can pay to display advertisements, service offerings, product listings, and video content and generate mobile application installs within the Google ad network; Facebook Ads, Bing Ads, Snapchat Ads, Twitter(X) Ads, Pinterest Ads, etc. Screenshot of Pinterest Ads website https://ads.pinterest.com/ Wilpert believes the key to choosing the right content platforms for pushing your content should be based on a content distribution strategy that focuses on using all three types of platforms, i.e., niche, social, and paid.
9.6 NOTE-TAKING AND ORGANISATION
APPS
Moreau (2023), writing in Lifewire, feels an app designed for note-taking can change how one can get things done. Based on various features, the Apps in her list of choices are:

Understanding Mojo Evernote tops her list and is available for iOS and Android devices. The app lets one organise notes into notebooks. A free account can avail 60MB and be synced across two devices; additional space and device syncing must be paid for. It can clip webpages and images, search for text inside images, and share and work on notes. Screenshot of Evernote website https://evernote.com/ Simplenote: This notes app works with iOS, Android, and other platforms and devices. It has a simple interface and basic organisational features such as tags and search. Users can collaborate with others, and notes are synced across their accounts. Screenshot of Simplenote website https://simplenote.com/ Google Keep is an iOS and Android app with a Chrome browser version. Notes are displayed as cards; users can colour-code them and add other attributes to help them find and share notes. Notes can be synced across platforms. Users can also set time--and location-based reminders with a voice memo feature for audio notes.
154 Screenshot of Google Keep website https://www.google.com/keep/

Besides the above, Moreau picks up Microsoft's OneNote, an iOS and Android Apps for Mojo app; Notebook, an IOS and Android app; Drop Box Paper Squid, an Android app for taking down handwritten notes; and iOS apps Bear, Notes and Notability.
9.7 COLLABORATION AND
COMMUNICATION APPS
Pot (2023) believes that team chat apps aren't just tools but are modern offices for remote teams that share a physical workspace. These apps also allow everybody in a team or a company to participate and see relevant conversations. After testing them, the apps selected have been picked on features like how they organise conversations, offer universal search with filtering features, offer video and audio chats, have easy navigation and control, and enable collaboration. Best of the apps, according to Pot, are: Slack: Available for iOS and Android, Slack has a general channel for the entire company and specific channels for specific teams or projects. Conversations in channels can be broken down into threads, with users notified if they are participants or subscribers. Team members can tag others and pull them into channels or threads based on team or project needs. It has both free and paid plans. Screenshot of Slack website https://slack.com/intl/en-in/ Microsoft Teams is available on both iOS and Android. The app is included with Microsoft 365 and is tightly integrated into the Microsoft ecosystem with the best audio and video quality, though with a cluttered user interface per Pot. Screenshot of Microsoft Teams website https://www.microsoft.com/en-in/ microsoft-teams/group-chat-software.

Understanding Mojo Google Chat is available on iOS and Android, and it was earlier called Google Hangouts Chat. Like Slack, it breaks conversations into chat rooms, similar to Slack's channels. Conversations are then forced into threads, helping things organise. As per Pot, this is included with Google Workspace, which has a great search feature but has the limitation of a limited feature set. Screenshot of Google Chat website https://workspace.google.com/products/ chat/ Besides the above, there are apps like Discord (https://discord.com/) for both iOS and Android, which was originally built with gamers in mind, though currently marketed to online communities, and iOS and Android compatible Element (https://element.io/), which has a fully encrypted messaging built on an open source protocol.
9.8 AUGMENTED REALITY (AR) AND
VIRTUAL REALITY (VR) APPS
In "Tom's Guide," Grannell says that augmented reality has arrived on smartphones, as today's handsets feature more powerful processors and cameras capable of superimposing immersive graphics on smartphone screens. He details the smartphone and its features, which support AR. He writes about the Galaxy S20 Ultra featuring a time-of-flight sensor offering support to AR apps or the iPhone 12 Pro, iPhone 12 Pro Max, and iPhone 13 with a LiDAR sensor to support a stable and powerful AR environment. Some of the best apps according to him which are free for both iOS and Android mobiles are "Just a Line" (https://experiments.withgoogle.com/justaline) which lets you make simple drawings in augmented reality, then share your creation with a short video; "Google Lens" (https://lens.google/) which enables one use one's mobile camera or an image to search the web, translate text, find homework help, identify plants and animals etc.; "Google Maps" (https://maps. google.com/) features an AR mode that helps one navigate by adding virtual signs and directional arrows over the live view on one's phone in order to point the way; "Mission to Mars AR" gives one a glimpse of what it might be like to be there; "Civilisations AR" to brings more than 30 different artifacts from across the many epochs and great civilisations of the world; "Quiver", an augmented reality coloring book app for children; "SketchAR" turns a smartphone screen into an AR drawing aid, overlaying a sketch or line art image on a blank piece

of paper that one can then trace over or use as the basis of one's own sketch; Apps for Mojo "Mondly's AR" features engages language learners with an animated chatbot as well as visualisations of objects and words as well as providing instant feedback on pronunciation and errors; "YouCam Makeup" is an AR-assisted selfie camera that doubles up as a makeup and fashion assistant, letting one preview a range of beauty products . Besides these apps, there are others with varied AR features.
Screenshot of YouCam Makeup app on Apple Store
9.9 LOCATION AND NAVIGATION APPS
Zahradnik (2023) writes about the best apps for iPhone in Lifewire. According to him, apps for iOS fall into two categories: ones where maps are accessed on the fly and ones who download maps. Some of these apps are: * Google Maps: This also has an Android version. In this app, traffic is powered by Waze, which Google owns. It calculates a way around traffic problems. * Apple Maps: Some features include a 3D look-around, effective lane guidance, a speed limit display, and a navigation screen free of distractions. * Other apps include "TomTom GO Navigation" app based on accurate, real- time traffic information; "Waze" (owned by Google) is the world's largest community-based traffic and navigation app; and "Gaia GPS" which started as a backpacking app and has expanded to include all types of outdoor recreational activities. * Among the best navigational apps on the Android platform besides Google Maps and Waze are "OsmAnd Map" GPS Offline", which offers an offline GPS service for many different vehicles and on-foot navigation; "Sygic GPS Navigation & Maps"; "Circuit Route Planner"; "Petal Maps" - GPS & Navigation; "GO Navigation" etc. (Bradbury, 2023)
9.10 SECURITY AND ENCRYPTION APPS
The above sections give an overview of the numerous mobile apps. If so much work is being done using mobiles, it is imperative that the work and the device used to do that work be secure from all kinds of threats. Glamoslija (2023) lists out free iPhone antivirus apps to protect iPhones. iPhones use a security

Understanding Mojo mechanism called "sandboxing", which prevents apps from making changes to other apps, files or processes in an iPhone. Hence, iOS antivirus apps don't provide traditional antivirus scanning. These antivirus apps do things like anti- phishing, scam SMS message protection, and Wi-Fi network scanning. Some free antivirus apps on her list are Norton Mobile Security, Total AV Mobile Security, McAfee Mobile Security for iOS, Bit Defender Mobile Security, and Panda Dome for iOS. Fisher (2023) lists four free antivirus apps for Android phones. In the case of Android, an antivirus app can clean up viruses, Trojans, malicious URLs, infected SD cards, and other mobile malware and protect from threats like spyware or improper app permissions. However, most free apps have limited functionality. Android apps include Bitdefender Antivirus, Malwarebytes Mobile Security, Avira Security Antivirus, and AVG AntiVirus. Among the paid apps, Norton Mobile Security, Lookout Security & Antivirus, McAfee Mobile Security, and Kaspersky Antivirus are available for mobiles. Besides antivirus apps to protect the mobile from viruses, malware, anti- phishing, and other threats, encrypted messaging apps prevent others from snooping on conversations. Spadafora (2023) writes that Apple's iMessage protocol also uses end-to-end encryption, but its Messages app, which is used to view encrypted messages, also handles unencrypted SMS text messages. Per Spadafora, one good end-to-end encryption message app is Signal, people's best-encrypted messaging app. Other apps are Telegram, WhatsApp, Threema, and Wire. All these apps are available for both iOS and Android phones. Besides messaging encryption, encryption apps are available for Emails, VPNs, and Password Managers, as well as for files and storage. Besides these, some apps encrypt the whole iPhone. Let's quickly summarise them here. Lord (2020), in the "Digital Guardian" blog, lists some encrypted Email apps like "ProtonMail" for both iOS and Android, "Virtru" for iOS, "OpenKeychain" and "CipherMail" for Android. Among Virtual Private Networks (VPN), it lists "Hotspot Shield", "Betternet", and "SurfEasy" for iOS and Android. Under Encrypted Password Managers, it lists "LastPass" and "Keeper", available for iOS and Android. File Encryption and Encrypted Storage Apps are "CoverMe", an iOS and Android app which provides an encrypted "vault" for secure file storage as well as end-to-end encrypted messaging and calling and "Secret Space" for Android, which is text/file encryption and password storage app. Waqas (2023) writes that there is a common misconception that device encryption is enough to prevent hackers from compromising online security. In addition to using the iPhone device encryption, several apps to encrypt various applications are used. He goes on to subdivide and list these apps. * Internet Encryption Apps: As personal data on iPhones is encrypted by default, one needs to use private browsers like TOR, Brave, DuckDuckGo, etc., and private search engines like DuckDuckGo, Qwant, and Startpage to keep searches private. Private search engines and browsers may hide one's IP address, but ISPs can still track it. Here, he suggests VPNs like
158 NordVPN App, Surfshark, and CyberGhost.

* Encryption Apps for Calls and Messages, which we discussed earlier in Apps for Mojo this section. * Encrypted email apps, which we discussed earlier in this section, are also included. * Encryption apps for files and folders: He feels iPhone users should also encrypt their data by encrypting the files and folders. He feels this is important because if malware or hackers can compromise the phone, these will be the first things they would compromise. Hence, it is crucial to encrypt files and folders to boost device security. There are also various free and paid apps on the iOS store like "Folder Lock", which password- protects files, images, videos, documents, contacts, wallet cards, audio recordings, and notes; "Sookasa", an encryption app to protect files on cloud services and "IKnox", a paid app for encryption. * Password Manager apps, which we discussed earlier. Finally, besides all the various categories of apps used by MoJo, Green (2019) adds another dimension to the role of MoJo and media houses today of making the news stories social media ready as the production of content for the social media takes a different format and style with each social media channel having its nuances. This is important as social media is a major source of information for the newer generation of news consumers. He writes, "The micro-storytelling format is grasped and digested quickly, so you don't want to have a production time of several hours when it's viewed in a few seconds." Even though many of the apps listed above in various categories help produce content for social media, Green has quoted examples of his own for social media storytelling. "Canva", a premium free graphic design app available on both iOS and Android platforms, is used for creating collages, combining videos with still images for Instagram Stories and infographics; "Storyboard" (only available on Android) which transforms video clips into images resembling a graphic novel which can be added with speech bubbles using the "Snapseed" app (available on iOS and Android), to help create a narrative and present a story in a new and engaging way; "PicPlayPost" an iOS and Android app which allows for the presenting of different images or video at the same time in different panels; "Stop Motion Studio" an animation app providing more possibilities on social media and "ThingLink" an Interactive graphic app which allows one to add multimedia buttons to a still image to bring up additional text, pictures or video. All are making for engaging content on social media channels. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the importance of note-taking and organisation apps?

Understanding Mojo 2. Why is it important for MoJo's to curate news stories for social media? Give examples of some apps which help them do so.

9.11 LET'S SUM UP
We have discussed the landscape of journalism that has undergone significant transformations owing to advancements in news technology. Mobile Journalism, or MoJo, stands as a cornerstone, leveraging the capabilities of mobile phones and the diverse range of tools accompanying them for news reporting. These tools empower journalists with the ability to record interviews, capture photographs and footage of events, and craft multimedia news stories, all from the convenience of their handheld devices. Notably, an array of applications facilitate various aspects of the journalistic process. You have learnt in this Unit about the capture and Recording Apps, including Filmic, MAVIS, and MoviePro, offer functionalities tailored to capture high- quality audiovisual content, essential for immersive storytelling. Similarly, apps like MuseCam, VSCO, and Halide Mark II enable journalists to generate engaging content tailored for social media and other digital platforms, fostering broader audience engagement. This Unit also covered the realm of post-production, Editing and Post-Production Apps such as PowerDirector 365, Adobe Premiere Rush, and LumaFusion equip journalists with the tools necessary to refine their storytelling craft, allowing for seamless editing and enhancement of multimedia content. Furthermore, Live Streaming Apps like Larix Broadcaster, nanoStream, and Wirecast Go facilitate real-time dissemination of news events, fostering immediacy and interactivity in journalism. Social Media and Content Distribution Apps play a pivotal role in amplifying the reach and impact of journalistic endeavors. Platforms like Qu Promote, Slofile, and HARO cater to niche media channels, while Google Adswhere, Facebook Ads, and Bing Ads serve as essential tools for targeted content distribution across paid media platforms, thereby enhancing the visibility of news stories. We have discussed additionally, Collaboration and Communication Apps such as Slack, Microsoft Teams, and Google Chat streamline teamwork and coordination among journalists, fostering a collaborative environment conducive to efficient news production. Augmented Reality (AR) apps like Just a Line, Google Lens, and YouCam Makeup offer innovative storytelling opportunities, enriching the immersive experience for audiences. Moreover, Location and Navigation Apps like Google Maps and Apple Maps facilitate on-the-ground reporting by providing journalists with reliable navigation and geolocation services. Notably, the security mechanisms inherent in different mobile operating systems, such as iOS's "sandboxing" feature, significantly impact the efficacy of antivirus apps in safeguarding mobile 160 devices from malicious threats.

For instance, while iOS antivirus apps are constrained in their capabilities due Apps for Mojo to sandboxing restrictions, Android antivirus apps like Bitdefender Antivirus,
Malwarebytes Mobile Security, Avira Security Antivirus, and AVG AntiVirus
offer robust protection against a myriad of mobile threats, ranging from viruses and Trojans to spyware and phishing attempts. Furthermore, encryption apps play a crucial role in ensuring the confidentiality and integrity of journalistic communications. Whether it's encrypted messaging apps for secure conversations or encryption tools for emails, VPNs, password managers, and file storage, these applications safeguard sensitive information from unauthorized access, bolstering the overall cybersecurity posture of journalists and media organizations. In conclusion, in light of these technological advancements, the role of MoJo and media houses extends beyond traditional news reporting, encompassing the dynamic landscape of social media. Crafting news stories for social media demands a nuanced understanding of each platform's format and style, underscoring the evolving nature of journalism in the digital age.
9.12 KEYWORDS
Adaptive Bitrate Streaming: Different streams with varying bitrates are served to users based on the strength of their internet connections. So, a user who has a stronger internet connection will be given a higher-quality version of a live stream than someone with a weaker connection. To do this, the video player detects any fluctuations in internet connections and processing capacity, then automatically upgrades or downgrades the stream's bitrate. The user sees a smooth, great-looking live-streaming video. This particularly helps with the stream-watching experience for mobile users who are on the move. Focus peaking, also called peaking highlights, is a real-time focus mode that uses the camera's Live View focusing aid to highlight peak contrast areas with a false-colour overlay in the viewfinder. This can help determine what part of the image is in focus before shooting. HLS protocol: HLS stands for "HTTP Live Streaming," which is how visual and audio media is delivered over the Internet quickly and reliably. It also works with HTML5 video players. HTML5 video player: This is currently the most customisable and compatible video player on the market, having replaced Adobe's Flash player. LiDAR sensor: LiDAR, which stands for Light Detection and Ranging, is a popular remote surveying method used to measure the exact distance of an object on the earth's surface. Log gamma curve recording helps increase the tonal range of footage in post-production. Cinematographers also shoot in logs to get the very last details. Multi-Bitrate Streaming or Transcoding: The live streaming app must first

Understanding Mojo create a stream in multiple bitrates to offer adaptive bitrate streaming. This is done by built-in automatic transcoding, which allows content to be pushed to audiences at various bitrates. The apps help serve the format best suited for the users without extra work. While adaptive bitrate streaming automatically adjusts the bitrate by continuously detecting all the changes to speed, multi-bitrate streaming helps publish videos with multiple bitrates for users to choose from. Multistreaming: Live streaming apps designed to let content go live on multiple websites simultaneously. RTMP: Real-Time Messaging Protocol is the most widely used video platform for broadcasting live video online. RTSP: Real Time Streaming Protocol is an application-level network protocol designed for multiplexing and packetising multimedia transport streams over a suitable transport protocol. It is used in entertainment and communications systems to control streaming media servers. Latency refers to the time between an action or command being input into a system and the action being carried out. It's the time between pressing a key on a keyboard and seeing the computer respond. Time-of-flight sensor: A time-of-flight camera, also known as a time-of- flight sensor, is a range imaging camera system for measuring distances between the camera and the subject for each point of the image based on the round-trip time of an artificial light signal, such as a laser or an LED. VPN: A Virtual Private Network creates a secure connection between a computing device and a computer network or between two networks using an insecure communication medium such as the public Internet. Zebra stripes from exposure warnings are a common highlight warning indicator in video cameras. They do not control exposure but warn you that your highlights are blown out and not recorded in the image. The function overlays some stripes into the image that indicate exposure levels, aiding exposure by showing a striped pattern over areas close to overexposure.
9.13 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bradbury, J. (2023, March 16). Ten best navigation and map apps on
Android 2023. https://www.androidpolice.com/navigation-and-map- apps/#waze-navigation-amp-live-traffic
2. Duhamel, H. ( 2023, September 21). The 20+ Best Live Streaming Apps
for Mobile Broadcasting [2023 Update]. https://www.dacast.com/blog/ best-live-video-streaming-apps-mobile/
3. Fisher, T. (2023, September 4). 4 Best Free Antivirus Apps for Android
Phones. https://www.lifewire.com/best-free-antivirus-android-4151993.4. Fox, A. (2021, December 22). The 8 Best Video Recording Apps for

iPhone and Android. https://www.lifewire.com/best-video-recording- Apps for Mojo apps-for-iphone-and-android-4176172
5. Grannell, C. (2023, September 6) Best video editing apps in 2023. https://
www.techradar.com/best/best-video-editing-apps
6. Green, D. (2019, June 11) Six must-have apps for mobile journalists.
https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/six-must-have-apps-for-mobile- journalism/s2/a740099/
7. Grannell, C. (2021, April 14). Best AR apps in 2021: Augmented reality
comes to your phone.
8. https://www.tomsguide.com/round-up/best-ar-apps
9. Glamoslija, K. (2023, December 7). 10 Best (REALLY FREE) iPad &
iPhone Antivirus Apps in 2023. https://www.safetydetectives.com/blog/ best-really-free-antivirus-for-ios/
10. Lord, N. (2020, August 6). 15 Free Mobile Encryption Apps to Protect
Your Digital Privacy. https://www.digitalguardian.com/blog/15-free- mobile-encryption-apps-protect-your-digital-privacy
11. Moreau, E. (2023, February 7). The 10 Best Note-Taking Apps of 2023.
https://www.lifewire.com/best-note-taking-apps-4136590
12. Pot, J. (2023, June 9) The five best team chat apps for business in 2023.
https://zapier.com/blog/best-team-chat-app/
13. Read, A. (2022, July 26). 24 Best Social Media Apps to Help You Create
Epic Social Media Content. https://buffer.com/resources/social-media-
apps/
14. Smith, K.B. (2019, November 4). 9 Must-Have Apps for Mobile
Journalists. https://www.switcherstudio.com/blog/9-must-have-apps- and-tools-for-mobile-journalists
15. Spadafora, A. (2023, May 11). The best-encrypted messaging apps in
2023. https://www.tomsguide.com/reference/best-encrypted-messaging-
apps
16. Waqas, I. (2023, August 9). 15 Encryption Apps For iPhone That Encrypt
The Entire Phone in 2023. https://beencrypted.com/encryption/guide/ encryption-apps-for-iphone/
17. Wilpert, C.V, (2023, October 25). 48 Best Content Distribution Platforms
(The Complete List). https://contentmavericks.com/content-distribution/ platforms/
18. Zahradnik, F.( 2023, January 5). The 5 Best GPS Apps for iPhone of
2023. https://www.lifewire.com/iphone-gps-navigation-apps-1683498
9.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1

Understanding Mojo 1. For editing and post-production, apps like Adobe Premiere Rush and LumaFusion offer features equivalent to standalone digital cameras. These apps allow users to adjust color grading, apply filters, add transitions, and incorporate multiple layers of audio and video. For instance, Adobe Premiere Rush provides intuitive editing tools and supports multi-track timelines, akin to professional editing software. LumaFusion, on the other hand, offers advanced features like keyframing and support for external hardware accessories, enabling intricate editing processes similar to those on desktop platforms.
2. Essential features of live streaming apps for Mobile Journalists (MoJos)
include stability, ease of use, and interactivity. Apps like Facebook Live, Periscope, and Streamlabs offer real-time engagement with audiences through comments and reactions. They also support high-quality streaming, integration with social media platforms, and the ability to switch between multiple camera angles, enhancing the storytelling capabilities of MoJos on-the-go. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The importance of note-taking and organization apps lies in their ability
to enhance productivity and streamline information management. These apps facilitate the systematic recording of ideas, tasks, and important details, thereby aiding in effective planning and execution. By providing features like categorization, searchability, and synchronization across devices, they empower users to stay organized and retrieve information effortlessly. Moreover, note-taking apps enable users to capture insights on-the-go, fostering creativity and preventing valuable thoughts from being forgotten. In educational contexts, these apps are invaluable for students in organizing lecture notes, research findings, and study materials. Overall, note-taking and organization apps serve as indispensable tools in today's fast-paced digital world, helping individuals manage information overload and achieve their goals efficiently.
2. It's crucial for Mobile Journalists (MoJos) to curate news stories for social
media to engage and inform their audience effectively. By selecting and presenting relevant news content in a concise and visually appealing manner, MoJos can capture the attention of social media users amidst the abundance of information. Curating news stories also allows MoJos to tailor content to fit the preferences and interests of their target audience, thereby increasing engagement and interaction. Examples of apps that aid in news curation for social media include Flipboard, which aggregates news articles based on user interests, and Buffer, which helps schedule and publish curated content across various social media platforms. Additionally, tools like Canva and Adobe Spark enable MoJos to create eye-catching visuals to accompany their curated news stories, enhancing their appeal and shareability on social media platforms.

UNIT 10 MOBILE JOURNALISM
EQUIPMENT
Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 Essential Tools for Mobile Journalism
10.2.1 In-depth Exploration of Mobile Devices (Smartphones, Tablets) and Their
Capabilities
10.2.2 Introduction to Essential Accessories: Microphones, Tripods, Stabilisers,
and Lighting
10.3 Mobile Editing Applications
10.3.1 Mobile Editing Apps for Video, Audio, and Photo Content
10.3.2 Workflow Optimisation for Efficient Editing On the Go
10.4 Live Streaming with Mobile Devices
10.4.1 Understanding the Principles of Live Streaming Using Mobile Devices
10.4.2 Exploring Live Streaming Platforms and Best Practices for Engaging
Content
10.5 Advanced Mobile Journalism Equipment
10.5.1 Specialised Tools for Mojo, Such As External Lenses and Portable Audio
Recorders
10.5.2 Evaluating the Benefits and Limitations of Advanced Equipment
10.6 Let Us Sum Up
10.7 Keywords
10.8 Further Readings
10.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
10.0 INTRODUCTION
Mobile phones are not only our way of news consumption but also our mode of news production. By now, you are well versed with the term "mojo", which is a portmanteau of "mobile" and "journalism". Mojo is no longer a new revolution but rather an established practice in news broadcasting. It is a way of reporting stories using only a mobile phone, where the reporter shoots, edits and files the story rapidly from the field. A lot of the news you consume daily through digital devices is produced on smartphones using minimal equipment. This is against the traditional method, where journalists must carry bulky cameras and accessories. While mojo has been around for some time now, people need to be aware of its enormous possibilities. Proper training and context are required for journalists

Understanding Mojo to tap the complete potential of mobile journalism, and they need to hone their skills to tell their stories effectively through this medium. As we learnt about the basics of mobile journalism in previous units, this Unit will focus on the tools and techniques required for practising mojo.
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Understand the basic equipment required for mojo; * Know the mobile editing applications and their use; * Comprehend live streaming with mobile devices and * Gain an insight into the advanced mojo equipment.
10.2 ESSENTIAL TOOLS FOR MOBILE
JOURNALISM
As a mobile journalist, you must understand the toolkit that enables you to create news stories on the go. Knowing the right technology to use at the right moment is crucial to realising its benefits. Whatever type of work you are involved in as a mobile journalist, you cannot deny the significance of mobile tools in all forms of communication.
10.2.1 In-depth Exploration of Mobile Devices (Smartphones,
tablets) and Their Capabilities The essential tools that a mobile journalist needs to keep handy have been presented below:
1. Smartphone
The first and foremost thing you need to pursue mobile journalism is a mobile phone with a camera. Any smartphone that offers ample storage space would be appropriate. However, the journalist should ensure the mobile phone can shoot in difficult light conditions and run good cameras and multi-layered video apps to get optimum results. For mojo work, there are two best-suited platforms: Android and Apple'siOS. The reasons to choose one over the other may vary based on your preferences. Advantages of Android: Customizability: Android smartphones offer a high degree of customizability at a relatively lower price range. They are more user-friendly and offer various choices concerning their layout and feel. Expandable storage: While the phone may have considerable in-built storage space to accommodate all your needs, you can expand it using micro SD cards. Cloud storage is another viable option for fulfilling storage needs. Many solutions, such as Google Drive or OneDrive, which can be seamlessly integrated with the Android ecosystem, are available.

More flexibility: Syncing Android phones with a Windows computer is far Mobile Journalism easier. Several file transfer methods, such as USB cable, Bluetooth, or cloud Equipment storage devices, are available. Higher affordability: Pricing is an important advantage of Android phones, as they are usually priced lower than their Apple iOS counterparts. Barring a few on the higher end of the spectrum, you can easily find a great Android phone with desirable features within your budget. Easier file management: The Android operating system makes managing files and folders smoother and easier. Like managing them on a PC, you can easily view, organise, save, share, and transfer your files quickly and efficiently on an Android phone. Advantages of Apple's iOS: While iOS phones have historically been expensive, their benefits make them worth the investment. These devices are feasible for mobile journalists who want to get the best output with minimal effort. Better Security and Privacy: The close-walled Apple ecosystem(where only Apple devices are compatible with each other, and when devices, users, manufacturers and app developers all belong to the same ecosystem) enables a more secure environment and guarantees a higher level of user safety. Better Performance: The processors in an iOS phone are known to make it a better performer than most Android phones, with faster and more fluid operations. The user interface of an iOS is quite simple, with fewer complications and straightforward settings. Better Support: Apple offers superior tech support for hardware and software- related issues. While the services may appear expensive, the quality of support is worth it. The local retail stores offer the best possible service to their customers. Offers best apps first: There is no denying the fact that the best app developers favour iOS phones. Most apps are launched first on Apple's App Store, much earlier than they go to Google Play Store. Lesser pre-installed apps: The iPhone has fewer pre-installed apps, thus making the device deliver better. While this list may not be exhaustive, it provides a basic overview of the two popular operating systems in the context of mojo work. A journalist may consider these when choosing a smartphone for news production. In a nutshell, a mobile journalist should consider the following features when choosing a smartphone: * Choose a phone that is compatible with your technical expertise * A phone that is sturdy and works fast * It can be easily integrated with various apps, formats and workflows

Understanding Mojo * A phone capable of running high-end apps to enable broadcast functionality * Can support apps to edit your stories quickly with finesse * Supports microSD card * Can easily transfer content to and from other devices * It has a long-lasting battery Some mobile phones even have different camera lens functions like wide, ultra- wide, telephoto, and macro lenses, which come in handy when changing the frame from one shot to another quickly without much effort. AI is also being integrated into smartphone cameras and large image sensors, enabling them to capture great photographs and videos even in poor light conditions. Durability is also increasing, as many of the latest generation phones are water-proof and dust-resistant, making them endure harsh environmental conditions.
2. Tablet
Though a tablet is less compact and lightweight than a smartphone, it is still a versatile and viable device for mojo work. Journalists may have several advantages while using a tablet to produce their stories. Some of them are: Larger screens: Tablets have a screen size that is more significant than a mobile phone and smaller than a laptop or PC. The relatively large display means you don't have to look through a tiny lens to focus on your subjects; you can see them crisply fit onto the screen. This allows you to check the output freely and more clearly. The functions are quicker and simpler on the interface of a tablet. It also allows multi-tasking as you can launch and switch apps on the fly. You can drag and drop, enter split-screen mode and swipe up to go home with a tablet, making multi-tasking more powerful and intuitive. Built-in keyboards: The keyboard in a tablet makes it as good as a laptop, which is not the case with mobile phones. Typing becomes much easier and faster with a tablet, giving you a laptop-like experience on a much more compact device. Access to a wider range of apps: Many apps are optimised for large-screen devices, making them more compatible with tablets. Such apps run better on tablets owing to more responsive layouts, multi-window support, continuity across screen size, and device orientation changes.
3. iPad
Apple designed and manufactured the iPad, a touchscreen tablet PC that is more compact and lightweight than a laptop. It is extremely versatile and suitable for performing a wide variety of tasks. It can effortlessly run the most powerful apps. With an iPad, you can easily work on multiple apps simultaneously and switch between them. Another important feature of an iPad is the Apple pencil. It can be used to draw anything and make handy notes. Moreover, it can also convert handwritten notes to typed text, which is a very useful function for mojo work.

10.2.2 Introduction to Essential Accessories: Microphones, Mobile Journalism
Equipment
Tripods, Stabilisers, and Lighting
Microphones Recording premium-quality dynamic audio is crucial to developing compelling video stories. A great video can be easily ruined with poor-quality audio, and until the audio is clean, the story will remain unimpressive. While working solo as a mobile journalist, you must know the tips and tricks for recording audio on your smartphone. You have to do all the work single- handedly without a sound recordist, so proper training is required to understand various sound principles. Whether recording a bite, interviewing sources, or capturing natural sound on tape, you cannot afford to mess with your audio. Moreover, audio strongly affects the story's emotion, thus promising better audience engagement. The first consideration is choosing the right microphone. While things are very much in control, and you are close enough to the source, with no background noise, the microphone of your device (smartphone or tablet) might fit the bill. However, that is only the case sometimes. There might be situations where you need an external microphone to achieve enhanced sound quality. Some key factors to consider when picking up the right microphone to meet your needs are:
1. Directionality
2. Connectivity
3. Budget
Directionality The ability of a microphone to pick up sound from a particular direction is its directionality. The microphones may have directional properties depending on which direction they will capture sound from while rejecting unwanted ones coming from other directions. Based on their directionality, the microphones can be classified into the following categories: * Omni-directional: This type of microphone picks up sounds uniformly from all directions. It works almost the same whether pointed towards a source or away from it, provided the distances are equal. It captures the desirable sound as well as the undesired noise in the same way. These mics may be used to record from multiple sources, where they can be placed on a table or used as neck mics for individuals. * Directional: These microphones are designed to respond best to audio coming from a specific direction, say, for example, front (and rear in the case of bidirectionals), while rejecting those from sides and rear. This makes them an ideal choice for recording in noisy environments. The directional microphones can be categorised as: >> Cardioid: These mics have a narrower pick-up pattern and are often used in handheld microphones. They are also found on video cameras

Understanding Mojo used by news and documentary makers, offering great possibilities for mobile journalists. >> Super cardioid: These are quite similar to cardioid but with a narrower angle of sensitivity. This feature makes them more focused, thus finding applications in live stage shows and similar events where spoken word is significant. However, they are very sensitive to wind and handling sounds, which needs to be taken care of.
Ivo Burum
Connectivity Another feature of your mic you would like to consider is the connectivity. A mic should have the right inputs for your devices, such as USB or XLR. Using a microphone with the right connectivity for your devices is important to ensure seamless integration and high-quality audio recording. Budget: Needless to say, the budget is an important deciding factor when choosing your mic. You should always research and choose the microphone that best suits your budget. A wide range of products are available at different price points based on specifications. Microphones can also be categorised according to their design and usage: * Shotgun * Lavalier * Handheld * Wireless Shotgun: These can be called "high-directionality microphones" as they are more directional than a typical cardioid or super-cardioid mic. These can pick up the sound from the desired source where the mic is pointed, located some distance away. Shotgun microphones are appropriate for covering an unfolding story, as reporters usually work close to the subject they cover. They are also preferable for voice-overs, especially when a non-reverberant vocal booth is unavailable. Some popular shotgun mics are the Sennheiser MKE 400, Rode Video Micro, Rode Video Mic NTG, and Sennheiser MKE 200. Lavalier Mic: Also called 'lapel' mics, these microphones are a great choice for a lower budget. Lavalier mics can be easily attached to a person's lapel, somewhere close to the mouth (6-8 inches away). They have an omnidirectional pattern and can also be placed on the table between two people sitting across

and talking, as in the case of one-on-one interviews. These microphones are Mobile Journalism available in both wired and wireless configurations. The prices generally Equipment vary depending on the size of the mic. Some preferred lapel mics are Rode SmartLav+, Sony ECM77B, Sennheiser ME 2-II and BOYA by M1. Handheld Microphone: Handheld mics are a smart choice to lend a new touch to your story. Very sturdy and rugged devices are called 'stick microphones'. Handheld mics are quite durable and can endure harsh working conditions. These can be used for recording interviews, putting pieces on camera in a news story, and also for the natural sound on tape. Covering the mic with a windshield is advisable to avoid wind noise. Handheld mics can be used even in noisy location news reporting, pivoting them between the reporter and the source. Handheld mics are available both wired and 'wireless'. Wireless Mic: A cordless microphone is a professional mic suited for mojo work. Highly flexible, these consist of a receiver that attaches to your phone and a transmitter microphone. You can record interviews and sound bites from a distance without much hassle and avoid the risk of tripping over a cord or cable. Wireless microphones can do a fabulous job where the talent is on the move, like in a presentation or walk-the-talk interview.
Tripods and Stabilisers
Most latest smartphones have an in-built optical image stabilisation system to steady videos. Yet, it is necessary to invest in a good stabilising accessory that may provide stability to your smartphone and prevent a shaky video. Cradles Cradles serve as structures to hold your mojo camera devices, providing the much-needed balance while working handheld. They can also offer attachment points for your smartphones, microphones, lights, and stabilisers. Their ergonomic design enhances efficiency and comfort while taking pictures and shooting videos. Some fit neatly on full-size tripods and can be attached with remotes to record tricky pictures and videos. Tripods It is ideal for carrying a compact, lightweight, and customisable tripod. Besides the traditional tripod, numerous versions are available in the market, like flexible tripod, tabletop tripod, etc. Some tripods are even highly adjustable, making them applicable in different situations. The Manfrotto Pixi Mini is a popular tripod with a robust build and smooth functioning. It can be easily mounted on surfaces like a car roof, a wall, or a filing cabinet. There are other options with a little more weight and versatile applications, like the Manfrotto 560B1. Gimbals As mobile journalism continues to become more popular, gimbals have emerged as an essential part of the Mojo toolkit. Mobile journalists have developed an affinity for gimbals to cover breaking news stories as they evolve, thanks to the silky-smooth footage obtained with little to no effort. These tools can greatly

Understanding Mojo enhance the video's quality, avoiding jerks and shakes and elevating the output to cinematic grade. Lighting Lighting is an important consideration to achieve quality videos and photos. While the natural light available is quite significant, the benefit of keeping an external light source handy can never be undermined. Despite superior technologies and in-built camera functions in a smartphone, low-light conditions pose a challenge. Being prepared in advance pays off. You can choose from various compact battery-operated lights specifically designed for phones. You should avoid lights that attach through the phone's headphone jack or lightning connector, as it is likely that there will be an external mic already connected there. A shoe-mount light, instead, would be a better bet. Some well-known smartphone light brands are Genaray, Ulanzi and LumeCube. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Classify the different types of microphones according to their directionality.

10.3 MOBILE EDITING APPLICATIONS
10.3.1 Mobile Editing Apps for Video, Audio, and Photo
Content All professionals involved in mojo work use various editing apps and software to create compelling news stories. While many journalists edit using desktop software, there are times when they need to edit on the go. A range of editing apps is available to facilitate filming and editing to create professional-looking videos on your device. These apps allow journalists to package their stories beautifully with video and audio elements, from sliding B-rolls to changing transitions, mixing music, and creating new titles. All this is done, and you can instantly file your story from wherever you are with an internet connection. Some of the video editing apps that are in vogue among mobile journalists have been listed below: * Splice * Magisto * Capcut 172 * Adobe Premiere Rush

* LumaFusion Mobile Journalism Equipment * Filmora * Filmic Pro * InShot * Filmmaker Pro * Vivavideo * Vixer * Kinemaster
* VN
* Alight Motion Audio editing apps: It is vital to edit the audio in your story, whether it is an interview, sound bite, ambient sound, voice-over, or simply any other music. You would be required to trim the beginning and end of interviews and other distractions and noise that you must fix. Some popular audio editing apps, both free and paid, have been listed below: * WaveEditor * WondershareFilmora * AudioLab * WavePad * VoicePRO
* Audio Evolution Mobile Studio
* FL Studio * Adobe Podcast * Dolby On Photo editing apps: * Adobe Lightroom * Afterlight * Snapseed * Adobe Photoshop Camera
* VSCO
* PicsArt * Over * Preview

Understanding Mojo For graphics and other work: Journalists often use graphics to meat up their stories with data visualisations. This enhances the story's credibility, explains things better and makes it more convincing. Graphics also provide other on-screen information to make the content engaging. The news stories must also be shared on various platforms to gain maximum reach and visibility. Some apps may be useful in achieving these objectives: * Canva: An app with numerous customisable templates, extensive design elements, and capacity to support various formats, Canva is almost indispensable for mobile journalists. It has an extremely user-friendly interface with powerful design features, is highly adjustable, and allows for collaborative work effortlessly. * Hootsuite is a social media management tool necessary in the age of social media. It can help journalists manage several social media accounts from one point. Since visibility equates to value, journalists must pitch their stories from various platforms and optimise their social media presence. The editing apps market is flooded with alternatives, and there is high-level competition among different apps. Some of the apps are freely available, while others require a subscription. Usually, the basic versions of most of the apps are free. At the same time, the full suite of features is available on a monthly or annual subscription, which is more suited for professionals and prosumers.
10.3.2 Workflow Optimisation for Efficient Editing on the Go
The first step in optimising your video editing workflow is understanding the process. This includes the stages involved, from capturing footage to the final export. Knowing the steps involved will help you identify areas to streamline and improve the process. Organising your footage, files, and projects is essential to efficient video editing. This includes sorting and labelling your footage, creating a folder structure for your projects, and backing up your files. A well- organised system allows you to easily access the files you need when you need them, saving you time and reducing frustration.
1. Research: Like traditional news reporting, researching the subject is the
key to start working on a story. Acquiring the requisite information is a vital beginning point to understand the workflow and decide what you are looking for and where you need to go. This is a part of pre-production, which helps you save time, energy and other resources and gets you organised.
2. Writing: Good writing skills are always considered an advantage, whether
traditional news reporting or mojo. Being a mojo, you work on quicker deadlines and provide breaking news stories, implying that you must write often and faster. Only the approach may vary, as the writing style may be in sync with the digital mode. The mojo should prepare a blueprint of the story with pictorial depictions and written notes, along with the list of potential sources to interview, shots to be included and the story's overall structure.

3. Shoot and Edit: The next step is simply to point and shoot. This exercise Mobile Journalism
covers the most important element of your story. A good mojo is adept Equipment at shooting and editing "on the fly". Making the most of the tools (apps) available in his arsenal, the mojo uses his smartphone or tablet to capture amazing visuals that tell the story and edit it by trimming shots, adding transitions, inserting text and layering it with appropriate audio. Mastery over the art of shooting and editing right there on the field will give you an edge as a mojo.
4. Geo-tagging:
For a mojo, geo-tagging may be something to put a premium on. It can be quite helpful to validate sources and their locations while recording useful information about where and with whom the interview occurred. It can be a handy way of sorting out the chaos, especially when reporting from crowded or remote locations. Geo-tagging can further the story's credibility, adding an extra layer of verification while increasing depth and accuracy.
5. Storage: Though it may not appear that important, storage assumes huge
importance while doing mojo work. You may likely have laid your hands on some very good stuff, yet during the chaos of reporting, things happen, and things get lost. You do not want this to happen as it may ruin a great story you were about to produce. Therefore, it is always advisable to have a storage solution to store your audio and video content, be it cloud storage or any other.
6. Socialisation: In the age of social media, you certainly want to maximise
the reach and impact of your story. Socialisation is important because it helps you pitch your stories to a larger audience and engage with them. Live streaming, Twitter threads, Instagram posts, Facebook posts, or podcasts are all powerful means of establishing your brand as a journalist. Buffer, Hootsuite, Sprout Social, Sendible, etc., are useful social media management tools for journalists to manage multiple accounts from a single dashboard. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the benefits of using video editing apps for mojo work.

2. Why is geo-tagging important for mojo stories?

10.4 LIVE STREAMING WITH MOBILE
DEVICES
Mobile journalists often find themselves covering breaking news, and one of the best ways is to get into live streaming using their mobile devices. Considering its ease, access, and cost-effectiveness, live streaming with a smartphone has become an all-time favourite. Innumerable people watch events and happenings on their smartphones, and many broadcast live on someone else's mobile device. In such a scenario, the significance of live streaming can simply not be underestimated, and journalists cannot afford to miss the enormous benefits of broadcasting their content live to a huge audience.
10.4.1 Understanding the Principles of Live Streaming Using
Mobile Devices
When live streaming through your smartphone or any other mobile device, there are some principles you need to follow to stream high-quality videos that your audiences enjoy watching.
1. Good lighting: Streaming live means finding the best bet with whatever
lights are available. While some smartphones have nighttime modes to compensate for low-lighting situations, that is not true with most devices. It is also advantageous to carry some light with you. Furthermore, you need to know the techniques (like three-point lighting) that will help you navigate poor lighting conditions.
2. Shots and Camera Angles: Creativity is the key, even when streaming
things live. It would help if you framed your shots to make your video look appealing. The shots and camera angles you choose can be a great way to set the tone of your story and convey a message. Good and appropriate camera shots and angles are necessary for creating appealing content, even when it is being streamed live.
3. Good Internet connection: Connectivity is paramount for a mojo
streaming live or otherwise. Without a good Internet connection, all your plans to stream live will be thwarted. Not only is it consistent, but the connection must also be stable, fast, and secure. Cellular data can also be utilised, but it's the least reliable connection for live streaming. A private Wi-Fi network or hotspot is a better alternative.
4. Stabilise your footage: Too shaky videos are undoubtedly unsightly to
watch. Until the footage is steady, your camera quality, lights, shots, and angles will all be worthless. Shaky videos may result in blur and even appear to be confusing. In-built stabilising options may be helpful, yet you may need to use a mount or stabiliser to ensure a seamless viewing experience for your audience.
5. Audio: External microphones are always preferable; a good mic can
substantially improve your live stream. Strategically, finding a place where you can cut down the background noise is a good idea. It would help if you moved away from anything interfering with your broadcast audio. It is only desirable if the viewers have to refrain from hearing your voice or the 176 sound of the story.

10.4.2 Exploring Live Streaming Platforms and Best Practices Mobile Journalism
Equipment
for Engaging Content
A live streaming platform offers video hosting solutions for users to broadcast their videos to the audience in real time. People get to watch the video while you create it. Various platforms can be utilised to live stream your videos, giving you more control over the content and viewing experience. However, choosing the right platform tailor-made to your needs can take time and effort. You need to know your audience and goals to decide the best platform for your work. While Facebook Live and Instagram Live have gained much currency among amateurs and professionals, the mojo may want a better grip over the stream and make it more organised. These platforms are also regularly upgraded, which constantly need to stay updated about the latest features and services. Some platforms that allow free live streaming are YouTube Live, Facebook Live, LinkedIn Live, X Live, Twitch, and Instagram Live. Others offer a paid plan with a host of benefits. Below is the list of the most popular live-streaming platforms according to their functionality and features:
1. Brightcove
2. Restream
3. IBM Cloud Video
4. Livestream by Vimeo
5. Wowza
6. Diecast
7. Panopto
8. Kaltura
Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. List some of the freely available platforms for live streaming.

2. Discuss why good lighting is important for live streaming.

10.5 ADVANCED MOBILE JOURNALISM
EQUIPMENT
As discussed earlier, a mojo kit may include some other advanced equipment and the regular tools required.
10.5.1 Specialised Tools for Mojo, Such As External Lenses
and Portable Audio Recorders
External Lenses
With advanced technology, smartphone cameras have come of age, integrating the best features and delivering commendable output. Yet, there are instances where they need to perform better. In such cases, it is recommended to utilise external lenses that can augment the clarity and increase zoom capabilities. These simple attachments can amplify the camera performance to a large extent by changing the aspect ratio, extending the field of view, achieving a compressed perspective, or enhancing the overall quality. These lenses can help you get the right shot, particularly spontaneous moments as they unfold. They may be wide-angle, telephoto, fish-eye, or any other type, just like regular lenses with various focal lengths. Kits with multiple lens options are also available. The lenses attach to the smartphone through an external clip or mounting plate. Sometimes, you may also need to attach neutral density filters.
Portable Audio Recorders
A mojo kit is incomplete without a portable audio recorder, essential to lend a professional touch to the videos. These compact devices can be carried along during the shoot, though you must be wary of stocking up the batteries. For day- long mojo work, you should change them frequently. However, some recorders can also run on AC power, making them viable for indoor shoots like meetings and conferences. Some professional portable audio recorders are Zoom H1N, Sony ICD-ux560, Zoom H4n, SONY PCM-D10, etc.
10.5.2 Evaluating the Benefits and Limitations of Advanced
Equipment The lenses may enhance the capabilities of your smartphone camera. External lenses act as boosters for your device, as you can experiment more with shots and perspectives. You can have more control over the footage and explore new dimensions of capturing your subjects and views. Secondary lenses may improve the quality of footage. External lenses can also produce high-resolution images and videos with greater clarity and detail. The lenses' small size makes them ideal for fieldwork. They can easily be tucked away in your pocket or bag without adding much baggage. While this equipment can be very empowering, it can pose certain challenges.

While these are power-packed tools, battery drainage may be an issue while the Mobile Journalism mojo is on the move. Charging may be a problem when reporting from difficult Equipment terrain, crowded spaces, or crisis areas. Even carrying extra batteries would be cumbersome, adding to the bulk and hindering movement. Whether it is the mobile device, that lighting rig, or the audio recorder, all consume power, which is a challenge to tackle. Manual switching of lenses can again be unwieldy, as it may not be feasible while covering quickly unfolding events and instantly evolving stories. While the automatic modes are available on mobile devices, the results are only sometimes very desirable. They often need to improve the quality of photos and videos. When taking photographs with your smartphone using an external lens, it should be noted that the focus and aperture of the photographs may get altered. Thus, the settings need to be adjusted to fix this. Moreover, not all lenses are compatible with every smartphone camera. You need to choose the one that can work in tandem with your mobile device. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the benefits as well as challenges of using external lenses.

10.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed the basic equipment a journalist should keep to accomplish his/her work and the features and capacities of smartphones and tablets for news reporting on the go. We also discussed the essential accessories like stabilisers, lighting and microphones. We also learned about the apps available for editing videos, audio, and photos from the field and the platforms available for live-streaming content.
10.7 KEYWORDS
Optical image stabilisation: Denoted by the acronym OIS, it is a mechanical technology that uses a gyroscope to stabilise images and videos by detecting camera movement and adjusting accordingly. It is quite useful when shooting in shaky scenarios or doing handheld work. Operating System: The program installed on a device enables it to run basic programs. Examples include Windows, iOS, and Android. At least one operating system is required for any device to run applications and other basic functions. 179

Understanding Mojo Three-point lighting is the basic technique for creating the lighting plan for any video. It uses three lights of varying intensities placed at different locations to illuminate a subject or a scene: the key light, fill light, and backlight.
10.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Burum, I. (2017). Mojo Workin' - Essential Mobile Journalism Tools.
Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://gijn.org/stories/mojo-workin- essential-mobile-journalism-tools/
2. From the Field: The Mobile Journalist. (2018). Retrieved 20 December
2023 from https://us.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-assets/83042_ book_item_83042.pdf
3. Burum, I., & Quinn, S. (2016). MOJO: The Mobile Journalism Handbook.
Routledge.
4. Burum, I. (2021). The Mojo Handbook Theory to Praxis. Routledge.
5. Burgess, C. (2020, 13 May). Tools for Mobile Journalism: Breaking
Broadcast News from the Scene. Avid. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://www.avid.com/resource-center/tools-for-mobile-journalism_ breaking-broadcast-news-from-the-scene
6. Pedersen, S. (2023). Mobile Journalism: Professional Tips and Gear.
Shure. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://www.shure.com/en-US/ performance-production/louder/mobile-journalism-professional-tips-and- gear-list
7.5 Essential Tools for Mobile Journalism in 2023 (2023, 1 August).
Journalism Web. Retrieved 21 December 2023 from https://www. journalismweb.co.za/5-essential-tools-for-mobile-journalism-in-2023/
8. Mobile Reporting Kit. (2023). Spartan News Room Powered by Michigan
State University School of Journalism. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://news.jrn.msu.edu/
9. Lill, B. (2020, 20 January). Five tips to get started with mobile journalism.
Journalism.co.uk. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://www. journalism.co.uk/news-commentary/five-tips-to-get-started-with-mobile- journalism/s6/a750507/
10. Staschen, B., &Vellinga, W. (2018). Mobile Storytelling: A journalist's
guide to the smartphone galaxy (Kindle Edition).
10.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Microphones can be classified as omnidirectional, cardioid, and super-
cardioid based on directionality. Omnidirectional microphones pick up sounds uniformly from all directions in a 360-degree pattern. Cardioid microphones have a narrow pick-up pattern, and super cardioids have an even narrower pattern and are more focused.

Check Your Progress: 2 Mobile Journalism
Equipment
1. The editing apps can simplify the mojo's work by facilitating quick editing
of the video, audio and other story components. The journalist can easily slide B-roll, add transitions, mix music, and create new titles. Following this, the story can be instantly filed from any location with an internet connection.
2. Geo-tagging is a quick way to keep track of sources, interviewees, and
their locations. It simplifies the mojo work, especially when reporting from crowded or remote locations. It can further augment the story's credibility, adding an extra layer of verification while providing depth and accuracy. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Some platforms that allow free live streaming are YouTube Live, Facebook
Live, LinkedIn Live, X Live, Twitch, and Instagram Live.
2. Appropriate lighting is necessary for any live stream, as it greatly affects
the overall result. Poor lighting that is not fixed may result in a completely unflattering video. Thus, an external light may be helpful, while the mojo should explore the best possible camera positions to receive optimum lighting. Check Your Progress: 4
1. External lenses can multiply the quality of the smartphone's photos and
videos. They can allow better shots and perspectives and improve zoom capabilities. Their small size is an advantage, making them ideal for fieldwork. However, switching lenses while on the fly can be difficult. Also, not all lenses are compatible with every mobile device; therefore, you must carefully choose.

BLOCK 3
MOBILE JOURNALISM
PRODUCTION PROCESS

BLOCK 3 INTRODUCTION:
MOBILE JOURNALISM
PRODUCTION PROCESS
Narrating an eye-catching news story involves many processes. Since newsrooms are shrinking thanks to the advent of many mobile-based tools, it is important for you to learn how to package your news story to cater to a wide variety of audiences. In this Block, you will learn the tools and techniques of news packaging with the help of a mobile device.
Unit 11: Reporting With Smartphone, In the evolving landscape of
journalism, the integration of smartphones has reshaped news gathering and dissemination. Once confined to traditional mediums, journalism now embraces the immediacy and versatility of mobile technology. This Unit explores the paradigm shift, examining the intersection of journalism and smartphone reporting. From redefining reporting techniques to navigating ethical considerations, learners delve into the multifaceted realm of Mobile Journalism (MoJo). Through comprehensive modules, students uncover the nuances of smartphone reporting, equipping them with essential skills for navigating the dynamic landscape of contemporary journalism.
Unit 12: Script Writing For Mojo Stories, Mobile Journalism stories have
revolutionised the field of Journalism. They have created a massive shift in working style and conception of news, especially in times of crisis, where it has become challenging to take professional cameras and other equipment to the field. In extreme situations where getting help was complex, Mojo made it possible to cover such areas and situations of high tension. It kept the people updated about public health crises like pandemics. Scripting for Mojo has its benefits and challenges, too. In this Unit, we will learn all about Scripting for Mojo.
Unit 13: Mobile News Packaging, The rise of mobile news technology has
transformed digital journalism, with mobile devices becoming indispensable for content consumption and distribution. This Unit explores the nuances of mobile news, covering content types, packaging techniques, and the evolving role of smartphones in journalism. Students will develop skills in small-screen storytelling, crafting compelling headlines, and leveraging multimedia elements effectively. You will also learn techniques for faster loading times, seamless social media integration, and tailoring content for diverse mobile audiences while emphasising ethical considerations in digital news reporting.
Unit 14: Mobile Editing and Production, In the fast-evolving landscape of
journalism, the rise of mobile journalism necessitates journalists equipped with proficient mobile editing and production skills. This Unit introduces the significance of mobile editing, highlighting its pivotal role in modern media dissemination. With smartphones as comprehensive tools, journalists can seamlessly capture, edit, and share stories with unprecedented efficiency. Mastering mobile editing empowers journalists to maximise the storytelling

potential of their devices, enhancing the impact and reach of their journalistic endeavours. Developing a sense of news is a major part of being an emerging journalist. With mobile devices around you throughout the day and night, it might be easy to experiment with narrating news through multiple media elements. Learning journalism might go beyond the typical classroom setting. We hope you will use the tools and techniques to tell your story to the world, not necessarily as a journalist but as a responsible digital citizen.

UNIT 11 REPORTING WITH
SMARTPHONE
Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 Revisiting Reporting Techniques
11.3 Quasi-Media Making and Mobile Journalism
11.4 Smartphones: A New Way of Doing Journalism
11.4.1 Prerequisites for Smartphone Reporting
11.4.2 Key Features: Pros and Cons
11.4.3 Novelty and Smartphones
11.5 Methods for Mobile Journalism
11.6 Classic Examples of Mojo Stories
11.7 Challenges of Reporting with Smartphones
11.7.1 Constraints
11.7.2 Content
11.7.3 Packaging
11.8 Ethics of Reporting with Smartphones
11.9 Future of Smartphone Reporting
11.10 Let Us Sum Up
11.11 Keyword
11.12 Further Readings
11.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
11.0 INTRODUCTION
As we know, journalism is collecting, preparing and distributing news and related feature materials through different media, such as print, electronic and digital media. A few years back, journalism meant holding on to a breaking story for up to a few hours before publishing it, when newspapers were the main medium for delivering news. With the advent of new technologies, the methodology of doing journalism has changed manifold. While journalists have accepted this challenge, news-gathering techniques have become different. As audiences are more interested in faster ways to get news, speed of news delivery has become the priority for contemporary news journalists. With media converging into one device- smartphones- the journalism industry

Mobile Journalism is gradually seeing a revolution in how news is covered. It is rare to find a Production Process journalist who doesn't have a mobile phone. According to the latest published research by internet and technology researcher- Mary Meeker, Indian users/ audiences spend an average of 28 hours on their phones per week. On the contrary, they spend an average of 4 hours and 2 hours on television and print editions, respectively. Also, the report suggests that 62% of smartphone users surf social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter regularly. It won't be wrong to say that the introduction of affordable smartphones and cheap internet services in Indian markets has accelerated the process of news consumption on mobile phones in the past decade. Technology can easily turn most mobile phones or smartphones into portable broadcast tools. Streaming video and audio to the web from a mobile phone is turning all journalists into potential mojos- an abbreviation for mobile journalism, also called smartphone journalism. In the present scenario, we can say that mojo has extended the news-gathering potential of any news organisation because, with a smartphone, one person can stream video and audio, take still photographs and send text from their device with access to a wireless/wi-fi network from any remote location. The news can be text, audio, still, video, or a combination. Reporting from smartphones is a standalone phenomenon that works alone. In this Unit, we shall learn about the various aspects of reporting or journalism using smartphones.
11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Understanding the latest trends of reporting in journalism; * Know about the characteristics and features of mobile journalism; * Gain insight into the methodology used for reporting with smartphones; and * Learn about the technical know-how of reporting using smartphones.
11.2 REVISITING REPORTING TECHNIQUES
Reporting is the heart and soul of journalism. From collecting facts to processing them to releasing them for audience consumption, journalism has taken a huge leap in the last few years. News reporting is the process of gathering and presenting 'unknown or less-known' issues of public interest, collectively termed as NEWS, to the periphery of the public acquaintance. Reporting facilitates news gathering for the public using media tools. It involves researching and presenting information in newspapers and other mass media. News reporting is based on the subject of its manifestation, called a beat. Every reporter gets a beat, which is the area in which he/she is well-versed and can present the facts smoothly. These beats can be developmental issues; events- city/national/international; arts, fashion, entertainment and glamour; politics; economic affairs; investigative reporting; crime and accident reporting, etc. Until now, you must be clear that reporting based on the nature of its 188 content presentation should be objective, clear and understandable, free from

duplications, well structured, result-oriented and ethical. Reporting with Smartphones The history of journalism is closely associated with the development of technology. The invention of the first printing press by Johan Gutenberg in 1440 gave rise to mass daily publication and, thereby, newspapers. The first weekly newspaper started in Vienna in 1610. The first newspaper in India was published on 29th January 1780 by James Augustus Hicky under the British Raj. Its name was 'The Bengal Gazette', the so-called 'Calcutta General Advertiser' or simply 'Hicky's Gazette'. By the 1880s, the newspaper was a general concept worldwide. After this technology advanced, the first radio broadcast occurred in 1920 in Pittsburgh in the USA, followed by television broadcasting by NBC and CBC- two US TV networks in 1939. In 1959, at the studio of All India Radio, Delhi, the first TV channel started an experimental telecast with a small transmitter and a makeshift studio, adopting the brand Doordarshan Hindi. The advent of new technology has always resulted in change and expansion of reporting techniques. History suggests that changes in reporting tools have transformed how journalists operate and sped up the whole process of news gathering. Compared to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, news travels faster today. This has been possible because smartphone reporting, commonly known as mojo, represents the latest iteration in this evolution. Mojo is providing new reporting opportunities to not just electronic media journalists but also allowing newspapers to compete with television and radio in breaking news about multimedia. The beauty of reporting with smartphones lies in its simplicity and convenience. With minimal training, capturing images and sound with a mobile phone is very easy, and content can be sent to the editor to be put in the public domain within minutes.
11.3 QUASI-MEDIA MAKING AND MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Primarily, the discussions of communication focus either on mass communication and its effects or on interpersonal communication. However, this dichotomy often leaves social media systems out of account, which have become increasingly attractive among users. Many socially vital communication activities utilise social arrangements and setups. Still, they can be characterised neither as mass communication nor person-to-person communication, categorised as 'quasi- mass communication'. In other words, in communication science, mediated quasi-interaction is a concept which talks about a monological interaction between people oriented towards an indefinite range of potential recipients. It involves a fundamental asymmetry between producers and receivers. For example, television, radio, newspapers and even mobile journalism are some forms of mediated quasi-interaction. In a rapidly changing world driven by frequent technological and scientific breakthroughs, the biggest and most significant breakthrough has been the introduction and proliferation of the smartphone in the 21st century. Though the first smartphone can be dated back to the early 1990s, it wasn't until 2007 that they became a major part of our daily lives. Over the years, smartphones have undergone constant changes and improvements with better cameras, faster internet connectivity, longer battery life, more memory, etc. Several applications

Mobile Journalism (apps)were also introduced throughout the journey to make work easy. Putting Production Process all of these together, we get the incredibly powerful tool-Smartphone, that has drastically changed how we live today. As smartphones have become more competent, the world has become more accessible. The way we consume news has also changed with the introduction of the smartphone. One can receive instant updates and news in real-time as the story unfolds. Not only this, but the smartness of our mobile phones also greatly affects how news is produced and reported. Till a few years back, when news broke, the reporter and a camera crew with bulky equipment used to make their way to the field, which resulted in a slight time delay. But today, a journalist with a smartphone can break a story immediately after an incident happens. He can tell the story from the beginning to the end, independently handling every step on their own. The power of a smartphone is huge. It allows a journalist to film, record audio, take photographs, edit video, write stories, connect and post to the web all at one go. It also allows the reporter's mobility, independence, and ability to work on the go, which is called mobile journalism or reporting using a smartphone. Unlike the conventional methods, reporting using smartphones is more affordable, flexible, empowering, discreet, friendlier and safer, all of which we will discuss in detail later in the Unit. Amidst all technological advancements and their implications, reporting using smartphones is still journalism. Technological changes have changed how news is reported, but journalism's basic rules and foundation remain the same. A Professional journalist develops new professional practices, adapt to new technologies and innovate during the journey of their careers. It is rare to find a journalist who doesn't have a smartphone. Moreover, free software can easily turn a smartphone into a portable broadcast tool, which makes it relatively easy to stream video and audio to the web. This extends the news-gathering potential of any news organisation as with a smartphone, one person can perform the comprehensive task of capturing a still image, a video, or audio, editing it with text and streaming it online with the help of an internet connection. Also, the convergence of technology, fast broadband and wireless networks and booming interest in citizen involvement in how news is covered gives an edge to journalism practices in India. However, it does not mean that all citizens can become journalists as reporting demands some expertise; citizen journalism has widened the boundaries of news gathering. Meanwhile, it is important to note that many Asian people can access mobile phones. Data suggests that in late 2008, 43 per cent of all mobile phones worldwide were in the Asian region, compared with a mere eight per cent in the United States. Mobile adoption has been remarkable around the world. It is the fastest-growing communication device in history. The past decade has seen a lot of change in how smartphones and the internet are used in India. It has resulted in a massive evolution in how news is covered by different media houses nationwide. Audiences now turn to the internet and smartphones for breaking news. Smartphones are being used as a medium to gather, produce and consume news.

Reporting with
Activity 1 Smartphones Keenly observe at least three television news channels and list news stories journalists report using smartphones. Compare the stories with conventional news stories. Differentiate based on the content and presentation.
11.4 SMARTPHONE: A NEW WAY OF DOING
JOURNALISM
The era of mobile media has driven communications convergence to a new stage. The last decade has seen a process of acceleration in mobile technology innovations. The peak of this scenario interests us to understand the various aspects related to smartphone communication, specifically reporting using a smartphone. Until now, we have understood that mobile journalism can be defined as gathering and delivering news using a smartphone. The technique of digital storytelling can be termed as 'smartphone reporting'. It is a new trend in news covering and broadcasting, which has the potential to become the new standard in journalism practice, mostly to break news.
11.4.1 Prerequisites for Smartphone Reporting
Smartphones today come with power-packed features, permitting sophisticated and live television reporting, replacing all the complicated and expensive equipment usually associated with making television news. Today, audiences know they can easily access the 'breaking news' on the internet through mobile phones before contacting their television sets or newspapers. Filling the story first for the mobile phone and the web has become second nature to many journalists. Preparedness: Reporting using a smartphone requires the journalist to be very alert, prompt, and prepared. In the cut-throat competition between channels for earning TRPs, the reporter must be ready and well prepared in advance to put on his/her journalist hat and start reporting the moment a news break. Having the gear handy: You must have understood now that a smartphone is a handy device, enabling the user to multitask. However, the journalist must keep his/her phone prepared to take pictures and videos when the news breaks. The phone should always be charged, as journalism has no scope for delay. Also, gear like the microphone, light, and tripod should be ready so the journalist can go into reporter mode anytime. Knowing your device: a reporter using a smartphone for reporting should know the product features, like the phone's functionality in different environments. Also, he/she should be well versed in the device's 'Pragmatic attributes' and 'Hedonic Attributes'. Here, Pragmatic attributes mean a smartphone's level and ease of connectivity between platforms -cellular and wi-fi. Meanwhile, hedonic attributes refer to simulation, identification, and evocation. Journalists must be aware of the applications (video and audio) smartphones can work with. A journalist using a smartphone for reporting is always advised to work on the device before diving into the work to become more comfortable with the workstation. 191

Mobile Journalism Mobile Application: As discussed above, the reporter needs to have complete Production Process knowledge of the applications that can be used to make the work easy and fast. Journalists can use various social media platforms like Twitter (now known as X) to remain informed. Various Google apps like Google Voice, Google Translate, Google Lens, etc., help new-age journalists perform faster. Apps like Zoom and Skype can also be used to do live reporting for a news channel while using a smartphone for reporting. Innovation: Reporting using a smartphone does make a lot of work easy by converging the technology to one point. However, this demands a lot of innovation from journalists. Finding and documenting something newsworthy is only half the battle. A journalist must put the different texts and elements of the story into a fluid, structured story. Structuring and telling the story correctly is an integral part of the process that can't be overlooked. Storytelling is an important element of mobile journalism or reporting with a smartphone.
11.4.2 Key Features: Pros and Cons
The flexibility and associated freedoms of reporting with a smart smartphone also have advantages and disadvantages. Let's learn and understand them. Below are some of the benefits of using a smartphone for reporting:
1. Smartphone reporting is low-cost compared with traditional reporting
methods and heavy-duty equipment. Capturing high-quality pictures, videos, and audio with phone needs without any additional cost is a money-saver. Even with the added costs, supplementary apps and equipment like mic microphones or tripods are a cost-effective way to tell a story.
2. Flexible: Reporting using a smartphone can be done single-handedly. It
doesn't require the hustle and bustle of too many people and equipment operators, making the work much more flexible. A reporter can move at his/her own pace, going wherever he/she wants to, whenever and without being held back.
3. Empowering: With the newfound flexibility and mobility comes much
independence for the reporter. He/she can work at his/her own pace and be free to choose the story. Using a smartphone for reporting empowers you to control every aspect of production, making your voice heard.
4. Discreet: There are instances where a reporter has to go to places he/
she doesn't want to go. This may be for coverage of any hard news or crime news per se. At such times, large camera and camera crews may have trouble accessing specific locations, events or happenings. But smartphones can be taken anywhere at any time.
5. Friendlier: A bulky professional camera can be intimidating. Reporters
might find it difficult to interview a politician or celebrity during a big breaking while using a professional camera, as they may be less open to doing so with the giant camera in their face. Smartphones are friendlier and familiar, making them more approachable to a person.

6. Safer: Journalism can be risky at times. Reporting on an incident like Reporting with
a natural disaster or from a war zone can be challenging. Using bulky Smartphones equipment can make it even more challenging. However, doing it from a mobile device prevents the reporter from drawing attention to himself/ herself in such riskier situations. It also allows the reporter to blend with the crowd and not be noticeable.
7. Makes job efficient: Reporting with a smartphone helps the journalist
be their cameraman, editor, and designer. With just one click, they can disseminate all the information in just a minute, making the job very efficient.
8. Democratised Craft of Journalism: Earlier, journalism was considered
the fiefdom of the intellect elite. However, with social media and smartphones, everybody can become a journalist, which has given rise to citizen journalism. This has ushered in the democratisation of the craft. There are two sides to a coin. With the many benefits of smartphone journalism come some disadvantages, too. Let's quickly understand the limitations a journalist faces while reporting using a smartphone.
1. Working alone: the downside to all the independence and freedom a
journalist gets while using a smartphone for reporting is that working alone can sometimes be difficult. A journalist is then responsible for every step of the process and every aspect of the project, from reporting to interviewing to filming and editing, all single-handedly, which can be exhausting. The journalist using a smartphone does a lot of responsibility and is expected to be well-versed in multiple skill sets.
2. Camera quality: Even though smartphones nowadays are loaded with
the latest technology, smartphone cameras are still fairly limited. They still need to film or photograph well in low-light settings compared to professional cameras with an apt lighting arrangement. They don't necessarily have an optical zoom, which might not give a very good- quality visual as required for television broadcasts. Phone cameras might also lack stability, producing shaky videos without any stabiliser.
3. Limited audio: Like the camera, smartphone audio is also fairly limited.
The recording quality drops significantly as the person moves away from the subject. Noise cut or noise correction may also not be proper because of the mic's lack of omnidirectional functionality. The reporter might face difficulty recording clear audio in overly crowded places outdoors.
4. Internet access and data dependence: A journalist might have difficulty
sending the feed through the smartphone in a remote area because of a lack of data or a poor internet connection. Being on the go and reporting from a wide variety of locations means that often, a journalist might not get a reliable connection, which may hinder his/her ability to work.
5. Battery: Despite their capabilities, smartphones generally lack long-
lasting batteries. The battery is mostly consumed by the applications frequently used by journalists to produce a new story. Keeping the battery charged is challenging in such cases, as a story may sometimes break. 193

Mobile Journalism 6. Storage Capacity: Another important limitation of using a smartphone Production Process for reporting is its storage capacity. With the number of applications one needs and the number of photographs, videos, and recordings required to break/file a story, a mobile journalist must keep ample room in the phone's memory card.
11.4.3 Novelty and Smartphones
Media houses have always been interested in new, more dynamic, lucrative ways to tell and sell news stories. The advent of the digital revolution and comparatively cheaper, more streamlined technology have led to an array of new hybrid forms. One such form is using a smartphone for reporting, a relatively free and limitless publication platform. Over a decade back, in 2007, communication moved from the desktop into the palms of the consumers and a new, more personalised smartphone era was born. In theory, the internet created a more democratic and diverse publishing model, which resulted in a shift to online communication. It made users feel they are part of a networked society, not merely as consumers but also as producers. One such aspect of novelty is citizen journalism. With the arrival of multimedia technology in mobile phones, citizen journalists have opened new news platforms to the public and pioneered the art of using raw materials to break urgent news into new storytelling styles. Reporting using a smartphone is active in areas where traditional media lacks the freedom of journalism and is a global phenomenon. Journalists worldwide are trying to take advantage of the existing technology in their smartphones for breaking news in case they cannot access their traditional equipment easily. However, in the current scenario, journalists on big media networks, like the TV Today network and Network 18, go deeper into exploring the world of mobile journalism. A premier example in India is NDTV, which has gone mobile since the latter part of 2017. Therefore, it is about more than immediate and breaking news; journalists can challenge their professional limits to dig into a story using mobile as a tool for journalism. Well-experienced journalists can also use their smartphones to indulge in good TV production, such as documentaries, drama series or professional news reports, thereby bringing novelty to journalism. The novelty brought by smartphones can also be linked to social media. Several mobile journalists are not related to specific media houses, and their main platform to publish the news is social media. The type of media content that freelance mobile journalists create is more suitable for social media, where things are shaped in an unofficial setup. Thus, social media platforms connect mobile journalists to their audience and the media houses. In some situations, like in the case of a war, natural calamity, or something unlikely to happen, the TV channel connects live with mobile journalists and establishes communication via social media applications like Skype, Zoom, etc. Individuals' work is considered a crowdsourcing process that helps media institutions focus on issues and problems raised by the audiences, bringing novelty to news coverage. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.

1. Define Mobile Journalism. Write about its need and relevance in the Reporting with
contemporary scenario. Smartphones

2. How is reporting using smartphones different from the conventional
methods of reporting? Explain with examples.

11.5 METHODS FOR MOBILE JOURNALISM
In the new world of breaking news, editors of media houses need to put into flexible teams of news gatherers who can provide content for the organisation's web, mobile, print or audio-visual editions. Stories driven by the news values are then delivered across platforms. Today, the media houses are aiming at multimedia, multi-media-focused newsrooms. No doubt, breaking news draws audiences to news organisations' websites. Multimedia breaking news builds an even bigger audience, thereby bringing more revenue. Theoretically, there are three levels of reporting: the first is 'breaking news', the second is the multimedia treatment of a news story, and the third is the feature form of reporting in a newspaper or a documentary kind of television channel. Mobile journalism is most appropriate for the first level of reporting- breaking news. Reporting from a smartphone can provide quick content for the website, such as a text message or a few sentences from the scene of an event. Mobile journalists can provide quick and repeated website updates and sometimes even write a story while on the field for a newspaper. There are a few software and hardware requirements for reporting using a smartphone, which are discussed below. Software: Several companies offer software that lets mobile journalists stream live video from a smartphone to the web. Reporters can use their mobile phones like miniature camcorders to capture news almost live. However, there can be a delay of a few seconds depending on the size of the transmitted file and the network being used. Some of the applications that mobile journalists frequently use for doing their work are Zoom, Skype, StreamYard and LiveU. Zoom is a cloud-based peer-to-peer application that allows mobile journalists to report live from any remote location. Through this mobile application, a reporter can also make video calls. Skype: Skype is a telecommunication tool by Microsoft Co. It provides VoIP, videoconferencing, and voice calls, helping mobile journalists report live without other technical support, just like Zoom 195

Mobile Journalism StreamYard is a platform for live coverage through smartphones. It is a Production Process professional live streaming and recording studio that allows a reporter to record content directly on the news organisation's social media pages with various customised features. LiveU is a leading provider of live video contributions for news. It enables the reporter to send a live feed while reporting with a minimum time lag. Many big media banners use this live video transmission and video streaming tool. WeTransfer is an application and website that enables users to send files globally in just one click. Large video files and photos can be sent. The application allows free transfer of files up to 2GB. Hardware: Smartphone: Though mobile journalism only requires a good quality smartphone, having the right phone is important. The phone chosen should be an 'easy-to-use' one that suits the technical level of the journalist. It won't be used if it is difficult to use. Also, choosing a phone with a fast, multi-core chipset that spreads the load to increase app speed and reduce power consumption is essential. Integration with all apps, formats, workflows and peripherals is also important. Microphone: if you are closer to your subject with little background noise, then the smartphone microphone or the one on the headset will be enough. However, using a third-party microphone is advisable if it's the other way around. Shotgun mics are most preferred for all hand-held close-quarter filming. These shotgun mics have a cardioid pattern that predominantly records sound in front of the microphone. Wireless microphones can also record audio when the source is at some distance from the smartphone and where the sound source might be moving in a demonstration or walk-and-talk interview. Lights: Smartphones are not normally equipped to capture a video in low- light situations. Therefore, on-camera lights can be used for a better visual experience. The intensity of the light should be taken care of while choosing one. Tripod: A lightweight tripod can be used as a handle to stabilise hand-held shots when attached to a cradle. It is easy to carry, provides extra height, and effectively changes angles. A tripod with a removable leg can be transformed into a monopod. Camera Cradles: Cradles are useful as they add structure, useability, and balance while working on a hand-held. They also provide attachment points for microphones, lights and tripods.
11.6 CLASSIC EXAMPLES OF MOJO STORIES
1. India's Farmers' Protest
In the year 2020-2021, the Indian farmer's protest was a protest against three farm acts that the Parliament of India passed in September 2020. In opposition

to the Farm Bills, often called 'anti-farmer laws' by many farmer unions, the Reporting with protest demanded the creation of a minimum support price (MSP) bill to ensure Smartphones that corporations cannot control the price. Soon after the acts were introduced, unions began holding local protests, mostly in Punjab. The protest was overtaken after several citizen journalists and mobile journalists posted news feeds on social media. Independent journalist, who also amassed a following on Twitter, routinely provided updates on the protest and its historical context. Their primary platform was social media. Many big and niche media organisations took up the news feeds of mobile journalists.
2. Controversies Surrounding Different Service Providers
Recently, there have been many controversies surrounding the various service providers, such as Zomato, Swiggy, Ola, Uber, and online pizza delivery companies. Citizens have been very active in journaling about various unpleasant events. One shocking incident occurred in 2018 when a Zomato delivery person was caught on camera by a citizen journalist opening packs meant for delivery and eating out of them. The man ate from one pack and repacked the rest, making it look untouched. The video went viral on social media, and the food delivery giant had to apologise on the public forum. A similar case happened with a leading cab provider when a driver was seen being thrashed by a woman traveller in Lucknow. The incident was captured on a phone camera, which went viral on social media, so much so that it became a news story on television. The police then interrogated the case, and the company had to look into the matter because of media hype. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Is reporting using smartphones a groundbreaking way of doing journalism?
Discuss its advantages and disadvantages to support your answer.

2) List two mobile journalism examples you have come across recently.

11.7 CHALLENGES OF REPORTING WITH
SMARTPHONE
In this digital media age, journalism's new features are characterised by convergence, mobility, and interactivity. Mobile journalism, or reporting using smartphones, has emerged as a new journalistic form that challenges the relationship between creators and recipients of media content.

Mobile Journalism 11.7.1 Constraints
Production Process
When discussing journalism and breaking news, the fundamental question is balancing speed versus quality. Breaking the story first may sometimes mean compromising accuracy. But journalism is all about truth and dare. Therefore, reporters must be fast and accurate to ensure quality content before breaking the news. Another constraint that mobile journalists have to deal with is infrastructure. Even though mobile phones constantly improve, a smooth network's availability remains the key issue. Reporters prioritise sending the news feed on time or streaming live video. Technical challenges such as battery charging are also important aspects and challenges faced by journalists reporting using a smartphone. In the quest to break the news first, sometimes journalists or media organisations are involved in potential legal problems. Obtaining on-the-spot images that are visually attractive and can earn TRPs sometimes lands the journalist in trouble. Therefore, legal and copyright issues remain a dominating constraint. Last but not least, mobile journalism also poses life risks and data risks. Like traditional journalism, mobile journalism is unsafe because of its risks and dangers to journalists, especially during war news coverage. Though reporting using a smartphone in risky areas has an advantage as it reduces the suspicion about the journalist, it also has a disadvantage. Similarly, risks and dangers in a journalist's life are related to the risks and security of the data used in the smartphone. The reports must be safely saved on the smartphone to prevent data copying.
11.7.2 Content
As discussed above, reporting news quickly and accurately is the biggest challenge media houses face with the new trend of smartphone reporting. The journalists are expected to break the news when it happens with full credibility. While mainstream journalists are at par with this approach, the reports made by citizen journalists are a controversial issue. Some people find it hard to believe in the news made by unknown sources who don't have any responsibility and commitment regarding the credibility of what they post on their social media handles. An ordinary person reporting using a smartphone might show one side of the coin without being assertive about the version of a credible source, which might not be the case with the journalists attached to the media house as they are versed with the ethical norms of journalism. It is common these days that most television news channels have a segment where they fact-check the reports filed by citizen journalists or freelance journalists through smartphones. The news stories taken here are mostly those which go viral on social media and might have some impact on society as a whole. Good quality content is the key to good journalism, even if it means sacrificing the willingness to publish exclusive and breaking news.
11.7.3 Packaging
Today, journalism is more about earning good TRPs. A journalist reporting using a smartphone must break the news first and deliver a news package. The news package includes photos, audio, animated information graphics, news tweets and live streaming. Journalists on the go use several tools and techniques to make packages. Different mobile applications can be used to make news packages. External devices like microphone, earphone, external

light, tripod, power bank. For a smooth package, a journalist is advised not to Reporting with Smartphones film in automatic mode, in bright sunlight in the dark, or against the light. As the news package may get telecast directly on the channel, it is important to take care of the technicalities of media production as well.
11.8 ETHICS OF REPORTING WITH
SMARTPHONE
One of the aspects of mobile journalism is that it involves professionals and amateurs in the same work that needs nothing more than a device and a sense of ambition. A large number of citizen journalists, who are ordinary people, produce a massive number of materials and products in the media industry both via social media platforms and directly to media institutions. In both cases, the individuals participate in newsmaking and push news organisations to highlight the issues that the individuals have raised. This is a good way, as it allows the journalist to dive deep into the subject and raise concerns, giving true essence to journalistic practices. However, with independence and freedom comes the factor of concern: the 'violation of privacy'. Using mobile phones for public filming without obtaining permission from the individuals being filmed is unethical. The fundamental values of journalism stay the same regardless of the medium. With the rise of false, paid, and fake news, ethical issues remain a matter of concern. Journalists from Asian professional organisations probably follow the organisation's code of ethics. However, reporting from smartphones is not restricted to professional journalists only and not all journalists are members of professional bodies. Therefore, freelance mobile journalists in India are expected to follow a personal code beyond the professional code. A journalist should be committed to voluntarily following the ethical codes of conduct to avoid damaging someone's reputation, trolling, and publishing false news. Another ethical aspect related to mobile journalism is the risk of violating the privacy of data, which may happen unintentionally when someone loses his smartphone or is hacked. The private data and footage can be stolen. The ethical side of violating privacy also has a relation to trust. Fake news is mainly aimed at tarnishing someone else's reputation, preventing people from knowing the truth. Mobile journalists must avoid floating misleading or fake information against human morality and ethical principles. Journalists throughout the Asian region need to understand the laws related to shooting video--a thorough knowledge of defamation law and related laws of privacy and trespass reports.
11.9 FUTURE OF SMARTPHONE REPORTING
A radical shift has occurred in how news is produced and consumed in a decade. Smartphones are getting more and more powerful with time, making it difficult to predict the scenario for next year. However, despite all these changes, traditional media still exists and survives. Even though mobile journalism comes with many benefits, it is far from coming to the notion that reporting from a smartphone can be an absolute alternative to conventional media options- TV, radio and newspaper. But, at the same time, many researchers have realised that at some point in the future, information will be communicated on wireless devices, and the primary device on which this will happen will be the mobile phone.

Mobile Journalism Meanwhile, there is no doubt that Internet penetration in India is high in urban Production Process and rural populations. The content created digitally is being heavily accessed on wireless devices. Many smartphone users in India use data connections to get news on the go. News agencies like Reuters and ANI are pushing video stories in the form of audio and video podcasts that can be run on laptops and mobiles. TV news channels, too, are coming up with short videos for their social media handles. Consumers have access to the news as it breaks, and they can access information at any place. For media houses, it is going to be challenging. They have to keep pace with technology and ensure that the news is delivered on time, as in the case of mobile journalism, there will be no luxury on time. Systems must be set to cross-check news and move it out quickly in the cut-throat competitive world.
11.10 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we have explored the various aspects of smartphone reporting. These include the theory and technicality of it. The traditional methods for gathering information for a news story through interviews, observation and document searches are lengthy and need perfect coordination between the journalists (reporter and photo/video journalist, who clicks and records all the visuals). However, fast-paced digital technology has transformed and accelerated how journalists work in the past decade. Journalists nowadays use technology to do their jobs well and quickly. As media scholars, we know that 'breaking news' drives traffic to news channels and newspaper websites. Therefore, speed has become a top priority for journalists and media houses, along with the element of novelty. A reporter armed with a mobile phone and an internet connection can get multimedia breaking faster than a team of reporters and camera people covering an event/happening. The large-scale use of smartphones and the internet has shifted media consumption patterns. Today, consumers want fast news on their technical devices. Reporting with smartphones gives way to speed reporting, but accuracy remains a challenge for journalists and media organisations. Reporting using smartphones also has ethical implications and privacy issues, which are all dealt with in this Unit.
11.11 KEYWORD
Quasi Media: The kind of media, which was once called mass communication, like books, newspapers, radio, TV, etc., that involves the stretching of social relations across space and time and which involves a certain narrowing of the range of symbolic clues is called quasi media. An example is Social Media. Phablet: A phablet is a mobile device that combines the size formats of smartphones and tablets with a tablet-like screen and a smartphone-like body. The word is a blend of phone and tablet. Fake News: False or misleading information presented as news is called Fake News. It is usually targeted at some person or used as propaganda.

Breaking news is receiving and broadcasting information about a recent event. Reporting with First, breaking the news often attracts more viewership to news channels, Smartphones earning them TRPs.
11.12 FURTHER READING
1. Burum, I. (2021). The MOJO Handbook. New York and London: Routledge.
2. Quinn, P. S. (2009). The Mobile Journalist- From Backpack to Pocket
Journalism. IFRA.
3. Quinn, S. (2011). Mojo-Mobile Journalism In The Asian Region. Konrad
Adenauer Stiftung
4. Salzmann, A. (2022). Responsible innovation in Mobile Journalism.
Skipnes Kommunikasjon, University of Bergen.
5. Schleser, M. (2021). Smartphone Filmmaking: Theory and Practice. New
York: Bloomsbury.
6. Schulz, P. J., & Paul, C. (2014). Mediation of Communication: Handbook
of Communication Science. De Gruyter Mouton.
11.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Mobile journalism, or reporting from a smartphone, is an emerging
technique of new media storytelling where reporters use portable electronic devices to gather news, edit it, and distribute it from their smartphones to their community via a stable internet connection. Today, it seems very relevant because of the country's high internet penetration and the demand for fast news.
2. When we compare smartphone reporting with conventional methods, we
see that mobile reporting is more affordable, fast, flexible, empowering, discreet, friendlier, safer, and efficient. However, it does come with technical limitations. Examples of smartphone reporting are war, natural calamity, remote areas, etc. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Reporting using a smartphone is a fast-emerging, new creative trend in the
media industry, revolutionising how news is gathered and disseminated to diverse audiences. Reporters and correspondents are now being trained to handle their mobile devices to broadcast news content using digital devices such as smartphones, tablets, digital cameras, etc. Using the all- in-one devices, journalists are single-handedly capable of doing all jobs without needing more workforce, which indeed is groundbreaking in the field of journalism. Advantages include speed, effectiveness, friendliness, discreetness, more freedom for the journalist, etc., while disadvantages include the required network connection, battery life, privacy issues, etc.
2. The learner can mention any two recent news stories that he/she came
across. 201

UNIT 12 SCRIPT WRITING FOR MOJO
STORIES
Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 New Age Storytelling
12.3 Difference Between Traditional Story Writing and MoJo Writing
12.4 The Process of Scripting
12.4.1 Choosing the Subject
12.4.2 Planning a Story
12.4.3 Research for Writing
12.4.4 Visualizing the Storyline
12.4.5 Writing the Story Draft
12.4.6 Writing the Final Story
12.4.7 Checking and Revising
12.4.8 Finalizing the Headline/Title
12.4.9 Checking and Concluding
12.5 Format of Scripting
12.6 Do's and Dont's of Scripting for Mojo
12.7 How to Use Collected Data in the Script
12.8 MoJo Scripting for Different Media
12.8.1 Writing for Internet
12.8.2 Writing for Television
12.9 Using Other Material like Quotes and Poetry in Scripting
12.10 Points to Remember While Scripting
12.11 Scripting for Different Kinds of Mojo Stories
12.11.1 Breaking News Story
12.11.2 Follow-up Story
12.11.3 Character-Based Story
12.11.4 Event Based Story
12.12 Let Us Sum Up
12.13 Keywords
12.14 Further Readings
12.15 Check your Progress: Possible Answer

Scripting for Mojo
12.0 INTRODUCTION
Stories Mobile Journalism stories have revolutionized the field of Journalism. They have created a massive shift in working style and conception of news, especially in times of crisis, where it has become difficult to take professional cameras and other equipment to the field. In extreme situations where getting help was difficult, Mojo made it possible to cover such areas and situations of high tension. It kept the people updated about public health crises like pandemics. Scripting for Mojo has its benefits and challenges, too. In this Unit, we will learn all about Scripting for Mojo.
12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to :
* Understand the Process of Writing for Mojo;
* Know about the Do's and don'ts of Writing for Mojo; * Gain an insight into writing essentials in the evolving field of Mojo; and * Learn to plan a story, research for a story and write it in a proper format.
12.2 NEW AGE STORYTELLING
Back then, people would wait for the newspaper to arrive the next morning to know what happened about an event, situation or crisis. With the broadcasting of news channels, people started to learn about things 24*7. Numerous internet platforms emerged with time, and news from around the world became available with a mouse click. The news became much more accessible. With time and need, the world of news has evolved. We have mobile phones, easy-to-carry devices with applications enabled, taking journalism to a newer level. Today, some resources stand beyond challenges to make information reach people reliably and easily. Challenges include fake news, misleading information, or poorly edited, out-of-context content spreading like wildfire. Mojo storytelling works in every possible way. Big media houses have adopted this approach and initiated separate slots in their programming timeline. It has become easier to record, edit and produce news content as Mojo makes a journalist less burdened from sharing heavy footage. Mojo has facilitated sharing raw video content in less time and simplified editing. There are applications to edit and produce news content that is user- friendly and professional at the same time. If two people, i.e. the reporter and camera person, cannot reach the situation as it becomes difficult during a pandemic, the reporter does the job with a mobile phone. It is quick, real, short, entertaining/informative and impactful. It is everything that the time requires. You can easily travel with simple equipment and a mobile phone to capture events/situations in any part of the world. It makes the reporter independent and the process easier.

12.3 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TRADITIONAL
Production Process
STORY WRITING AND MOJO WRITING
Scripting is a basic yet crucial part of any production. Although the scripting process has evolved with audio or video production format changes, the essence has remained the same. The art of conveying in a grasping manner is what makes a script stand out. Let us understand how scripting for Mojo stories differs from other established formats. * Mojo scripts are compact, crisp, and to the point, built using a vocabulary of everyday language. Traditional story writing builds a strong background and sometimes approaches the subject indirectly, whereas, in Mojo stories, a direct introduction to the subject is practised while writing. * Traditional storytelling describes every aspect of the story in variable detail and sometimes discusses previous links associated with the story. Although most Mojo stories are short and comprehensive, they stick to the current scenario. The script must cover exactly and accurately what is happening now. * Writing for Mojo stories involves capturing visuals on a mobile phone, which may follow different cuts and editing methods. So, the script must be a clever interpretation of the visuals. In traditional storytelling, there is some liberty in choosing from the multi-cam set-up. * Mojo story writing allows you to write on various subjects on the spot. So, one must be well prepared with facts and details about the subject. * Mojo's story plays a vital role in covering extreme or crucial situations, such as natural calamities or other threatening or hazardous events. In such cases, the writing helps to assemble the footage containing various details recorded entirely on the spot. The writing also provides good transitions and effectively sums up the whole scenario. * It is said that a photograph is equal to a thousand words. But we also know many times that many channels use the same visuals, but what is said becomes a considerable factor in the impact building. Scripting in day-to-day language and telling the story in first person account with a creative story structure with valid references is usually the requirement. On the other hand, traditional storytelling can also be told in a third-person account. * In Traditional Storytelling, different people may play different roles. Still, in a Mojo story, the reporter has to handle the camera work, decide on the shots, take interviews, and write the script simultaneously. So, MOJO writing is not just the words you hear; it is about knowledge, learning, experiences, and attention to detail, which make a well-written script.
12.4 THE PROCESS OF SCRIPTING
Understanding the process of scriptwriting is very important. Whenever we see a film or hear a drama on the radio, watch a news piece or scroll over a reel on social media, the script can make a subject interesting and impactful at the same 204 time. But how? Let's try to understand.

12.4.1 Choosing the Subject Scripting for Mojo
Stories There are different beats of journalism. A subject is chosen based on relevance and recent occurrence. However, the treatment differs from channel to channel or person to person. The scriptwriter should understand the subject very well before starting to write anything. Some events happening today might be associated with some previous happenings. The writer should be aware of it and could research it to make the writing authentic and potent.
12.4.2 Planning a Story
Planning involves brainstorming ideas and deciding on the treatment one will give, aspects to cover, whom to interview, and whether to include vox pop. Then, you plan your writing according to the elements involved. For example, writing to connect the interview to Vox Pop. You can only do that properly when you have clear planning and how to execute.
12.4.3 Research for Writing
Well-researched scripts are reflected in the final product. There are primary information resources, such as contacting the people involved or who witnessed the event. Then, secondary resources like searching the Internet or finding research/s or facts in the concerned department. For example, suppose you are writing about a health issue. In that case, your primary information can be gathered from a person suffering from that issue, and secondary data can be collected from the Health Department of India or WHO, etc.
12.4.4 Visualizing the Storyline
When a story is conceptualized, the writer has a vision which he pens down. The story is created first in mind and then on paper. You use your imagination and knowledge creatively to develop a step-by-step procedure. The introduction will be from a VO, i.e., voice-over with a long shot, then the body of news will contain the required elements, and the conclusion will be a montage with a VO, etc.
12.4.5 Writing the Story Draft
Writing for Mojo's story is an interesting process because the art of writing is compact yet appealing here. The first draft is usually a rough draft where you write something, then read it to make changes and then write again. That means you now have written words to improve and correct. The first draft may be longer, may contain some grammatical or other errors, or may not be as explicit as you expected. But it does serve as a base to continue for better writing.
12.4.6 Writing the Final Story
This part of the process is where you finalize the draft, which includes a proper catchy introduction covering all the important elements in the body of the story and a thought-provoking conclusion. The script must explain the subject unbiasedly and raise questions in the audience's minds.

Mobile Journalism 12.4.7 Checking and revising.
Production Process
Checking for grammatical or other errors is very important in the final draft. The language used should be crisp and proper. Also, the writer must remember that it should not hurt the sentiments of the individual, community, religion, nation, and culture. It should not be derogatory or contain any unproven facts or unsubstantiated claims. The writer has to be careful with the choice of words as it may impact many people.
12.4.8 Finalizing the Headline/Title
A catchy headline or title decides whether people will watch the story. The title should state what the Mojo story is all about. It should be inclusive yet short. If it's misleading in any manner, then the whole story will be impacted. The title should follow the SCISSOR method. S - Simple C - Catchy I - Innovative S - Short S - Supportive to the story O - Objective R - Relevant
12.4.9 Checking and Concluding
Lastly, read the final script as a reader or viewer to feel how your writing will be conceived. You can conclude by repeating the important points, making a powerful statement that will have an impact, or raising a question that will lead people to think more about your subject after the news broadcast. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Explain five differences between Mojo Script Writing and traditional Script
Writing.

2. What is the process of scripting? Mention all steps and explain any five
steps.

Scripting for Mojo
Stories

3. List five news ideas and write reasons why they are relevant to be picked
up.

12.5 FORMAT OF SCRIPTING
You might come across various styles and formats when you see a news story. Mojo storytelling itself challenges traditional ways and is constantly evolving. They are more interactive and expressive. But the essence of journalism lies in the proper communication of facts. For that, you must understand the basics of any news writing, which is the inverted pyramid structure of writing, and for broadcast news writing, the Dramatic Unity Structure is used. Once your basics areu cnldaerrisfiteandd, yMoouj oca nne wuns dwerristtianngd b eMttoerj.o news writing better. The lead The most important information 5Ws and 1 H
The Body
Important details and information
The Tail
The least important information is enclosed. The 5 Ws are What? When? Why? When? Where, and 1 H is How? Good news writing will Thaen 5sw Wer st haersee qWuehsatti?o nWs ihneitnia?l lWy shoy t?h eW auhdeine?n cWe here, and 1 H is How? Good news writing will answer these questions initially so the audience will fully understand the event. Other important information follows, such as further details, a background story, arguments, disputes, etc. Finally, in the end, the information that may be deemed required and has interest value can be added. Dramatic Unity Structure consists of 3 parts - Climax, Cause and Effect. Climax: The first part gives the most important information to the viewers, such as the story's lead. It also discusses what happened. Cause: This part tells the viewers why it happened. After knowing what happened, one wants to know why it happened. The occurrence of an event has a cause or reason. So, this part allows the audience to understand the reason.

Mobile Journalism Effect: This part gives further insights into the story. It can discuss the impact, Production Process actions, consequences, measures taken, etc. Mojo story writing adheres to the basics of news writing, but it allows you to be more creative and experimental to create a more valid, authentic experience for people.
12.6 DO'S AND DON'TS OF SCRIPTING FOR
MOJO
* Do not over explain. Remember that you are writing to support visuals. Write when you feel the visual needs to be clarified, or the words will enhance its beauty. * Use words that are easy to speak and everyday spoken language. This allows people to connect with the story. * Don't use offensive language or hurtful words. If the script is derogatory to the country, its culture, foreign relations, any religion, etc., it will be rejected, or you may face the consequences. Learn to write what must be said in a powerful yet respectful manner. * Don't repeat too many words. Overuse of particular words and phrases might make your script dull and monotonous. * Use authentic information from verified sources in your script. Today, a lot of information is freely available from multiple sources. Take time to check your facts before writing them down in the script. Use official websites and contact the concerned departments or people to get verified information on your subject. * Give credit to the writer or poet if you use their poems or quotes in your scripts. * Make your script unique and exciting. Add punchlines and use creativity to enhance your script. * Do extensive research to add credibility to your script. Look for primary and secondary sources of information to support your script. * In Mojo, time is of the essence. Learn to say more in fewer words, avoid writing long sentences, and practice saying the same things in fewer words. * Write in a conversational language. Write as you are speaking to the viewer. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write down 2 Do's and 2 Don'ts to remember in Mojo Script Writing.

2. Select two news items and identify the 5 Ws and 1 H in them. Scripting for Mojo
Stories

12.7 HOW TO USE COLLECTED DATA IN THE
SCRIPT
The subject can be fascinating, the shots may be accurate, and the script could be creative, but if the facts and figures are not properly utilized, the production will lose its value. So, one must know how to utilize the gathered information and data. You have learned about how and where to collect data for your report. Now, let us see how we can use it in the script. There are different ways to teach facts in your script. When you state research data, always mention the name of the agency, department, or organization from where you obtained that data. If the data is shocking or makes the subject even more relevant, you can start writing your story with it. For example, if you are writing about the increase in inflation. You may share the percentage, and after establishing that it will affect the audience, you may write in detail about what is happening because of it or what things in the future may look like. Another way to start a story is to talk about a person affected by an event and then later mention the data to support your news. For example, if you are writing about the increasing school dropout rate in certain areas. You may begin your story by telling about a child who dropped out and let people know why he did that and how things are going for him. Afterwards, you can mention the percentage of students who drop out each year in that area. The benefit in this case is that people will connect emotionally with the child and pay more attention to the data. In the era of Mojo, reaching directly to the audience, you must not overload your news piece with narrating facts and figures at once. A balanced writing approach is necessary, or you may lose the audience's interest.
12.8 MOJO SCRIPTING FOR DIFFERENT
MEDIA
Mojo has emerged as a fast, effective tool that needs minimal resources to capture any happening and gives a detailed outlook to the audience. When we say fast, we must remember that the skills should be polished, and preparations must be on point. Writing for Mojo requires quick and effective writing skills, as you must reach out to the audience with a full news package in no time. Journalism and Writing basics remain the same, but let us understand how Mojo's writing for television and the Internet differs.
12.8.1 Writing for Internet
Firstly, we should understand that the Internet offers a lot of content in different formats. Journalism should not be confused with vlogging. Its sole purpose differs, which is why the way of writing differs. Journalistic writing

Mobile Journalism revolves around information, while a vlog might be made for entertainment on Production Process information based on personal opinions. Writing for Mojo on the Internet gives you more freedom and space. You can take advantage of flexible time duration; if the news piece demands more, you can write more about it. Your writing must be crisp and clear, as skipping or scrolling is common on the Internet. Suppose, for any reason, the visuals captured in some part are not of good quality, yet you want to use it as it is very important. Then you may mention that in your writing if the situation allows. People like things to be realistic. If the story is long, you may release it in multiple parts on the Internet, covering different aspects in different news videos. This gives space for some extensive writing. The news content must abide by the journalistic guidelines, rules and ethics to keep the spirit of real journalism alive in Mojo. It is fascinating and competitive simultaneously, but only write what you know. Don't make assumptions or believe social media blindly. You are writing for a medium which is sadly a hub for fake news, so you must get all facts checked before writing them into a script. Write fast, but do not allow time constraints to make you less vigilant towards authenticity. The Internet has a variety of audiences; know your Target group, understand your audience and write accordingly. The Internet is a medium of interaction; it is not a one-way street. So, write accordingly. Read a few comments, take feedback on the same subject and write what people want to know about that subject.
12.8.2 Writing for Television
For decades, television has been the platform for 24-hour news broadcasts. Now, Mobile journalism is taking another step ahead. From High-quality cameras to taking videos on phones and broadcasting them, television has shown its capacity to accept and evolve. Writing for such a medium in Mojo, where a certain news standard is set, becomes crucial. You have to write with the footage or visuals collected in mind. The standards and policies of each channel are definitive. You have to write keeping them in mind. Every journalist has his way and style, which also must be considered. For example, suppose you must write a connecting VO of a journalist covering the Olympics in a foreign nation and a vox-pop Indian audience cheering for India. In that case, your writing must maintain enthusiasm for sports and pick on the journalist's words for better connecting lines. Let us take another situation of a journalist covering a crisis like an earthquake or flood. In such cases, the journalist usually speaks while covering the event, and a script is only needed for the parts where the journalist cannot be adequately heard or to add some info that has arrived after the journalist has finished his recording. In this scenario, you have to write short and direct. It would help if you wrote to inform and not scare people of the situation. It is the type of writing that helps people understand a scenario easily and lets people see all sides/ perspectives of an event. The time slots are fixed on television, so I must write accordingly. Even if the news seems huge, you must fit it into the scheduled time slot.
12.9 USING OTHER MATERIAL LIKE QUOTES
POETRY IN SCRIPTING
Powerful lines, poetries, and stories have successfully imparted wisdom, 210 strengthened cultures, united people, and initiated societal change. That is the

power of words. Numerous great poets and authors have written brilliantly Scripting for Mojo on different aspects and areas. We know that even when India fought for Stories freedom from British rule, the songs and slogans helped people get together and motivated them to stay strong. We are talking about using this writing on a concerned subject. First, make sure that the lines you use accompany your subject. It would help if you used the exact words while quoting somebody else. The poetry may be long, but you can use a couple of lines depending on the necessity of the script. While using poetry, remember that you do not break its flow. You can listen to poetry readings to develop an understanding of its flow. For example, there is a very famous poem written by a great Indian poetess named Subhadra Kumari Chauhan on Jhansi ki Rani -Laxmi Bai. The entire poem is very long, but you can select the lines like - ^ped mBh lu lUkkou esa] og ryokj iqjkuh Fkh cqansys gjcksyksa ds eq!g geus lquh dgkuh Fkh [kwc yM+h enkZuh og rks >k!lh okyh jkuh Fkh*- Here, these three lines make up a paragraph that repeats. It is the main stanza. Other stanzas consist of more lines. When you write, you feel 2 lines or four lines make a balanced poem, but a poem has its flow, and you have to recognize that by reading it out loud before writing it down. The paragraphs in poetry may contain lines in the order of 4-2-4-2 or 4-3-4, etc. Depending on your writing language, you can use Urdu, Shayari or any other language for poems. The writer also has to ensure that the people understand these lines well. You can explain it a bit if needed. There are a few well-known lines which serve as the identity of the poem. You can use those lines to get the desired impact. If you choose any lines from the middle of the poem, it should justify the accompanying visuals. Always give credit to the writer/poet whose lines you are using. This way, your script will have more elements and sound great. It is not necessary to use a quote or poem in a script; it depends on the requirement and creativity. In Mojo, you must be precise with the words. You cannot narrate a whole poem or use full paragraphs as it will take time and may shift attention from the news. It can be a concluding choice of P2C or an introductory voice-over. It should only be used to support the main subject.
12.10 POINTS TO REMEMBER WHILE
SCRIPTING
* You should be able to explain your news in the first paragraph. People should know what they see and why it is relevant to them from the beginning. * Avoid stereotyping in your scripting, as it will make your writing taste bad. * To be a good writer, you must first be a good reader. You should read books of different genres and articles and listen to good podcasts, interviews, and news stories. 211

Mobile Journalism * Raise those questions with your writing that you think the audience would Production Process want to know, such as what happened, why it happened, what will happen next, what the solution can be, etc. * What you want to highlight, you can write about it twice or more than that but try to be creative and not repeat sentences. For example, you want to highlight that schools will reopen on 20th January after winter break. You may write this differently at different times. One time, the sentence could be 'Schools are reopening on 20th January'; another time, it could be said,' It seems like the fog will settle down on 20th morning, giving school children a clear morning to go to school after winter break. Etc. * There should be clarity in writing, or people may need to understand even well-shot footage. * Script Writing should be in a talking form. It should not feel like a huge monologue or opinion expression. * Always remember to use full forms first in the news. When a word is repeated, you may use its acronym. For example, first, you can write World Health Organization; then, on repetition, you can write its acronym, WHO. * If a sentence appears complicated for the general audience to understand, change it in your script and simplify it. Keep it easy and real. * When you write, be aware that you are not passing judgment or defaming someone. * If you have a choice between a long word and a short word when both mean the same, choose the short one with easy pronunciation. * While writing, forget other things around you and focus on the subject for better results. * Always choose your words carefully. Different words have the same meaning but different intentions. For example, 'Childish' and 'Childlike' both mean behaving like children, but the first word has a negative tone, and the second has a positive tone. In any language, use words that match the tone of your writing. * Try to make a sentence short. Long sentences can often be confusing and time-consuming. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Mention 5 points to remember while scripting for a Mojo story.

2. Identify a Mojo story and write a new script for the video. Scripting for Mojo
Stories

12.11 SCRIPTING FOR DIFFERENT KINDS OF
MOJO STORIES
Mojo stories are not different from other stories, but they overcome the limitations of other stories. They can be recorded in crises, uploaded soon, etc. Let us understand how to write scripts for different kinds of Mojo stories.
12.11.1 Breaking News Story
When something happens that affects the majority of people or matters to them. It is shown to people as soon as it happens. These stories are broadcasted even between other stories because of their priority level. You get very little time to write these stories. It is important to understand what is happening and then write about it. Sometimes, when in a hurry, the wrong words or meanings can get delivered. So, you have to be very careful. In such cases, full information is often unavailable for writing, so you will have to manage and write what you know till now. It should not feel incomplete but should be able to build anticipation.
12.11.2 Follow-Up Story
Following up on important news is as important as a new story. While writing for a follow-up story, you must know about the original story, its timing, its changing dynamics and what the audience should know about it now. You can reference the original story pic and where it ended and continue. You should introduce the newer aspect of the story and mention why it is relevant to follow up on it. For example, if a crime has been committed and a story has already been broadcast about it, the court has given its verdict, so you write a follow- up story and write about the latest developments in the case. When the court declares the person responsible for the crime, you may mention that in your script. But before that, the media did not have the right to call a person a thief, murderer or criminal just based on other information. Be particular about your chosen words, as they can have a huge impact.
12.11.3 Character/Person Based Story
It can be a human interest, political, criminal, etc. Still, if any story revolves around a person or focuses more on a single person or group rather than an event, we will discuss it here. When you are writing about a famous person or someone who has achieved something commendable and is now getting famous, there is much information about him/her roaming on the Internet. Other celebrities or political personalities will also give statements. When you write about such a personality, you can include statements given by some well- known people. It would help if you avoided rumours and gossip. You can find

Mobile Journalism a new angle and write something new, as there must have been many articles Production Process or videos about that person. So, if you are writing about him/her now, it should differ from previous productions or add value to them. If there is a controversy, do not just write about one side of the story but also try to find out about the other side/s. A writer must be unbiased and should not write based on his/her personal opinions. Avoid using controversial words or derogatory remarks that defame someone.
12.11.4 Event Based Story
When you are writing about a recent happening or event, things are new and still unravelling. Being updated minute by minute becomes important. Study the visuals properly before writing, and then start writing only. If you have important information but do not have the visuals yet. You must make sure that you write in such a way that people get the whole idea, even without the visual. You or your team can use graphs or animation during such times, but the role of the script becomes more crucial in this scenario. Many times, in Mojo, the reporter is like a one-person army. He/she records, edits, writes, and produces. You will have to write where you feel the connectivity of visuals could be improved or the flow of the story could be better.
12.12 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we learned about writing for Mojo stories. We discussed how it is different from other traditional storytelling methods. We learned about the writing process and the format to follow while writing a news story. We discussed how to utilize data and other available information in scripting. We learned about the Do's and Don'ts of Writing for Mojo. We discussed writing for different mediums and kinds of stories. We also came across important points to remember while writing.
12.13 KEYWORDS
Smartphone journalism: Journalism practised using smartphones. Digital storytelling: Storytelling at digital platforms. Mobile news production: Creating, editing, and producing news with the help of mobile applications.
12.14 FURTHER READINGS
1. Mobile Journalism: A Handbook for Reporters" by Glen Mulcahy
2. Mojo: The Mobile Journalism Handbook" by Ivo Burum and Steve Davis
3. Smartphone Media Production: A Media Revolution for Everyone" by
Robb Montgomery
4. The Mobile Journalism Manual" by Markus Meissen
5. Mojo Guide to Mobile Journalism" by Wytse Vellinga

6. Mobile-First Journalism by Steve Hill, Paul Bradshaw Scripting for Mojo
Stories
7. Mobile Storytelling in an Age of Smartphones by Max Schleser, Xiaoge
Xu
12.15 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Five differences are as follows: -
* Mojo scripts are compact, crisp, to the point and built using the vocabulary of daily use language. Traditional story writing builds a strong background and sometimes approaches the subject indirectly, whereas, in Mojo stories, a direct introduction to the subject is practised while writing. * Traditional storytelling describes every aspect of the story in variable detail and sometimes discusses previous links associated with the story. Although most Mojo stories are short and comprehensive, they stick to the current scenario. The script must cover exactly and accurately what is happening now. * Writing for Mojo stories involves capturing visuals on a mobile phone, which may follow different cuts and editing methods. So, the script must be a clever interpretation of the visuals. In traditional storytelling, there is some liberty in choosing from the multi-cam set-up. * Mojo story writing allows you to write on various subjects on the spot. So, one must be well prepared with facts and details about the subject. * Mojo's story plays a vital role in covering extreme or crucial situations, such as natural calamities or other threatening or hazardous events. In such cases, the writing helps to assemble the footage containing various details recorded entirely on the spot. The writing also provides good transitions and effectively sums up the whole scenario.
2. The process of scripting is as follows: -
1) Choosing the Subject
2) Planning a story
3) Research for Writing
4) Visualizing the storyline
5) Writing the story draft
6) Writing the final story
7) Checking and revising.
Check Your Progress: 2
1. Two Do's and Don'ts of scripting are as follows: -
* Use authentic information from verified sources in your script. Today, a lot of information is freely available from multiple sources. Take time

Mobile Journalism and check your facts before penning them down in the script. Use official Production Process websites and know the concerned departments or people to get verified information on your subject. * Do extensive research to add credibility to your script. Look for primary and secondary sources of information to support your script. * Don't use offensive language or hurtful words. If the script is derogatory to the country, its culture, foreign relations, any religion, etc., it will be rejected, or you may face the consequences. Learn to write what must be said in a powerful yet respectful manner. * Don't repeat too many words. Overuse of particular words and phrases might make your script dull and monotonous. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Here are a few points to remember while writing a script: -
* There should be clarity in writing, or people may need to understand even a well-shot footage. * Script Writing should be in a talking form. It should not feel like a huge monologue or opinion expression. * If a sentence appears complicated for the general audience to understand, change it in your script and simplify it. Keep it easy and real. * When you write, be aware that you are not passing judgment or defaming someone. * If you have a choice between a long word and a short word when both mean the same, choose the short one with easy pronunciation.

UNIT 13 MOBILE NEWS PACKAGING
Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 Mobile News
13.2.1 Short Content
13.2.2 Personalised Content
13.2.3 Live Streaming
13.2.4 Local News
13.2.5 Fact-Checking
13.2.6 Entertainment Content
13.3 Types of Mobile Media
13.3.1 Text Articles
13.3.2 Image-Based News
13.3.3 Video News
13.3.4 Audio News/Podcasting
13.3.5 Live Streaming
13.3.6 Social Media Content
13.4 Packaging Mobile Media
13.4.1 Packaging Text Articles
13.4.2 Packaging Image-Based News
13.4.3 Packaging Video News
13.4.4 Packaging Audio News/Podcasting
13.5 Smartphone for Mobile Media Packaging
13.5.1 Writing on Smartphones
13.5.2 Pictures and Audio/Video
13.5.3 Mobile Editing
13.5.4 Value Addition and Sharing
13.6 Future of Mobile News Media
13.7 Let us Sum up
13.8 Keywords
13.9 Further Readings
13.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers

13.0 INTRODUCTION
Production Process
The rise of mobile news technology has a greater impact on digital journalism. Mobile devices have become one of the important platforms for consuming and distributing journalistic content. In its survey of 50 countries, the Reuter Institute of Journalism found that 62% of the population consumes content on their mobile devices. If we look at the younger generation, in the age group 18 to 24, the percentage goes up to 92%. Due to this, we find various types of mobile content and tools have emerged, keeping mobile devices as a platform. The popularity of mobile devices gave rise to mobile journalism. It is a form of journalism where journalists do reporting and other necessary work through their smartphones. They create and file stories using their smartphones only. The implementation of tools and support in mobile news-reporting education is crucial. It helps grow media skills and know-how in mobile journalism. It is essential for the development of a platform and skilled human resources. The advancement of information and communication technologies (ICTs) has had a profound impact on digital media. New forms of digital journalism continue to emerge, requiring different skill sets and knowledge of using digital media. Mobile devices are adding to users' overall news consumption. Many users say that mobile is always accessible, so they consume information as and when they have time. There is also a trend of users getting news from new sources on their mobile devices. The rise of mobile news has opened up many opportunities for journalism, provided it is approached correctly. For journalists, this means adapting to the changing landscape by developing the necessary skills to produce and deliver content that meets the needs of mobile audiences.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Learn small-screen storytelling by creating clear stories from complex information; * Learn to craft compelling headlines, utilise impactful visuals, and leverage multimedia elements like video and audio; * Understand learn how to package content for faster loading times, ensure readability on different screen sizes, and integrate seamlessly with social media platforms; * Know would learn techniques for using smartphones to capture high- quality video and audio for news stories; * Know how to tailor content to specific mobile audiences and platforms. This could involve utilising data analytics, understanding user preferences, and optimising content for maximum engagement; and * Explain the ethical considerations of news reporting and information dissemination in the digital age.

Mobile News Packaging
13.2 MOBILE NEWS
Mobile media has become the primary way of consuming news and informative content. In a Reuter Institute of Communication report, 72% of Indians consumed news and information through their smartphones, whereas only 35% of users consumed content on computers and laptops. This shift has led to changes in how content is produced and consumed. The following are the key trends in mobile media content:
13.2.1 Short Content
Recent trends suggest that people are more interested in consuming short content. Therefore, content producers focus on producing short articles, videos, and infographics. The popularity of YouTube shorts and Facebook reels strongly supports this trend.
13.2.2 Personalised Content
When we consume content on smartphones, we generally do it through news apps. These apps provide us with content and collect our watch history, search history, and interests. Based on this history, news producers create an algorithm to provide us with personalised content.
13.2.3 Live Streaming
As news content is consumed on smartphones, news organisations also include new ways to give their users a better experience. To provide breaking news, producers need not wait for visuals and images; instead, they go for live streaming on their platform. Now, users can experience real-time feeds through live streaming.
13.2.4 Local News
This is another area where mobile media is concentrated. One of the important elements which define news is proximity. People want to know about the events and incidents that occur in proximity. With mobile phones becoming one of the prominent tools for consuming news, content creators are coming up with apps that focus on local news only. Today, many apps provide content about a particular city or town.
13.2.5 Fact-Checking
This is one of the growing areas of news production. Mobile has filled the gap between news producers and consumers. Consumers also produce content through pictures, writeups, and videos. Many platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, depend greatly on user-generated content. But when everybody is a content creator, there is always a problem of fake content circulated among users. To know whether a piece of content is fake or authentic, news organisations are developing platforms that provide fact-checking.
13.2.6 Entertainment Content
Mobile media and entertainment have become deeply intertwined in our daily lives. With the ubiquitous presence of smartphones and tablets, we can 219

Mobile Journalism access many entertainment options at our fingertips. India boasts a vibrant and Production Process growing entertainment industry and mobile media is crucial in distributing and consuming entertainment news. 72% of Indians consume entertainment news through smartphones, highlighting the dominance of mobile media. News aggregators like Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint are extremely popular, offering curated content and short formats. Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter are major entertainment news sources, with dedicated accounts and trending hashtags. Local and regional news apps cater to India's diverse linguistic and cultural landscape. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How are smartphones useful in creating image and audio/video-based
content?

2. How are AR and VR-based content the future of mobile media?

13.3 TYPES OF MOBILE MEDIA
Mobile news can be presented in several formats, each with advantages and disadvantages. Here are some of the most common formats:
13.3.1 Text Articles
This is the most used news format for mobile. It should be simple and easy to read. Mobile text articles provide a concise overview of the news story. Mobile platforms should be created in a manner suitable for quick updates. Mobile users want to get updated and breaking news instantly. One disadvantage of this format is that text-based articles are limited in conveying complex information and need more visual appeal than other formats.
13.3.2 Image-Based News
Image-based news can be a series of images or a single image with important information. This kind of content is eye-catching and engaging. It conveys information quickly and efficiently. However, it might need more depth and details and is suitable for all news stories. This kind of content is usually light and gives general details of an event.
13.3.3 Video News
220 Video news is a multimedia presentation, which involves presenting news

through video footage, audio, and written content in one package. This kind of Mobile News Packaging content is highly engaging and informative. A resourceful source can produce this kind of content. News organisations with all the resources have a lead in generating this kind of content. The consumption of this kind of content requires high-speed internet; this is one of the limitations of this type of content.
13.3.4 Audio News/Podcasting
This is one of the fastest-growing mobile news types. People can listen to podcasts while doing other work, like driving or doing other work. This type of news is convenient for people interested in quality and in-depth analytical news. Podcasting requires focused users who have to focus intently to understand properly. This type of content is not suitable for all environments.
13.3.5 Live Streaming
Live streaming provides real-time updates. It is done by live streaming an event with live commentary. It allows users to witness events as they unfold. Live streaming has brought mobile media ahead of TV news because now mobile media can also provide breaking news like TV through live streaming with the added feature of an interactive news format, where comments and inputs can be added by users themselves.
13.3.6 Social Media Content
There are many social media platforms, and all the platforms have different formats for content sharing. For example, if you are sharing content on Facebook, then you have no word limit, whereas if you want to share something on X (formerly Twitter), you have to share it crisply, as there is a word limit of 240 characters. Similarly, if you share video content on Facebook, it has to be in landscape mode, whereas if you share content on Instagram, you have to shoot it in portrait mode. You should also have a portrait-mode video for Facebook reels and YouTube shorts. Facebook reels and YouTube shorts also require different kinds of content generation skills, where you have to be very concise and crisp and able to share the central idea of the content in a short video of 1 minute or less than 1 minute. Social media content fosters discussion and engagement, but at the same time, this medium is prone to misinformation and biased content. It would help if you were very careful about the news source.
13.4 PACKAGING MOBILE MEDIA
Packaging news content for mobile platforms involves optimising news articles' layout, design, and functionality to ensure they are easily readable and engaging on mobile devices. This includes using responsive design techniques, optimising images and videos for mobile viewing, and ensuring fast loading times. Responsive design means that your content gets optimised according to screen size. As mobile phones have different screen sizes, content should respond to screen size. It is also important to include various functionalities in news articles, such as sharing, commenting, or saving them to read later, even without an internet connection. These functionalities make your platform

Mobile Journalism more user-friendly and accessible. It is also important to look after the image
Production Process
resolution and video size. Heavy images and big video files sometimes slow down the page's loading. Make sure that you compress these files so that the page opens quickly. You can also leave it for users to select their preferred media resolution. They may select on their own according to a data plan.
13.4.1 Packaging Text Articles
Let us discuss some key points of packaging text articles:
I. Attention-grabbing headlines
In mobile news, it is important to write eye-grabbing headlines so that users tend to click the headline. To get clicks, craft clear and concise headlines. Headlines for mobile platforms should be short (60 characters). Sometimes, content creators use misleading headlines to get clicks, but it should be avoided as, in the long run, your platform will lose credibility. A bit of headline obscurity is accepted to get clicks, but that should not be manipulative. Your headlines should accurately reflect the article's content.
II. Scannability
Research suggests that on-screen users tend to read less; they want to scan the content to get an overview of the information. They only do in-depth reading on topics of their interest. Therefore, making your story scannable is key to the success of your mobile content. To do so, integrate the following things: a. Subheadings: Break down long texts with informative subheadings that guide readers through the content. b. Bulleted Points and Lists: Use bulleted points and numbered lists to highlight key points and improve readability on small screens. c. Inverted Pyramid Style: Keep crucial information upfront, followed by less important information. In news writing, there is an acceptable rule, which is an inverted pyramid. Follow the style which says that the most important information should be shared straight away in the first two paragraphs. d. Keep your content short: When writing for mobile platforms, aim for concise articles, ideally under 300 words. Users like to read quick, digestible content on the go. e. Simple Language: Use simple, easy-to-understand language. Do not use ornamental language, as it is common for users. Write in an active voice and avoid jargon. f. Multimedia Integration: Enhance your text with relevant images, infographics, or short videos. Visuals add context and improve reader engagement. g. Highlight Shareable Quotes: Include impactful quotes or sentences that readers can easily share on social media.
III. Optimisation

You need to optimise the font type, font size, theme colour, and platform design Mobile News Packaging as per the mobile interface. To do so, the following things need to be taken care of: a. Font Size and type for increased readability: Ensure a font type and size that's comfortable to read on a mobile screen. Some fonts look beautiful, but that might not be good for reading comfortably. The criteria for selecting fonts should always be readability. Font size should not be too small or too big; both are not good for readability. (Around 16px is a good starting point.) b. Whitespace: Use ample white space to avoid text density and create a visually clean reading experience. c. Mobile-Friendly Formatting: Optimise your content for various screen sizes and orientations. Consider using a responsive design or a content management system that handles mobile formatting automatically. d. Active reading: link relevant articles within your platform to keep readers engaged and exploring further. e. Offer an "Estimated Reading Time": This will inform readers about the time it will take to read the article. f. Read Aloud Functionality: This can improve accessibility and cater to readers who prefer audio consumption.
13.4.2 Packaging Image-Based News
There are several mobile platforms which provide content through images. Images are powerful tools for grabbing attention and conveying information quickly. One of the common formats to do so is creating photo essays. A photo essay is a collection of images placed in a specific order to tell the progression of events, emotions and concepts. A photo essay uses the same storytelling techniques as a normal essay and is translated into visual images. Instagram, Facebook stories, TikTok, and other platforms support photo-based content. The photo essay is a brilliant way to bring your images to life and touch your family, friends and people. Here's how to package image-based news for maximum impact on smartphones
I. Storytelling with Images
a. Find a topic: The first step to telling the story through images is to find a topic. Photo essays are most dynamic when you care about the subject as the content creator. Whether you choose to tell the story of the first month of a newborn in the family or a child in misery on the roadside, make your topic something in which you find interest. b. Do your research: If you portray a child's misery, spend some time on the spot. Try to find out their parents and what they do. Try to find out whether the child goes to school or not. Talk to the neighbours and find out some interesting facts about him. These factors will help you plan the shots you set up for your story. 223

Mobile Journalism c. Find the "real story": After your research, you can determine the Production Process angle from which you want to take your story. * Is the child malnourished? * Does the child possess some unique quality? * What kinds of games do he play? * How many times does he eat? d. Touch the heart of its audience: Every dynamic story is built on a set of core values and emotions that touch the heart of its audience. Anger, Joy, Fear, Hurt, and Excitement are all human emotions. Draw out the emotions within the story. It is not manipulation but a connecting point. e. Plan your shots: After following the above steps, you can think about the type of shots that will work best to tell the story. One should start with a shot list for the story. Each shot will work like a sentence for a one-paragraph story. You may start with ten shots, and each shot must focus on different concepts or emotions that can be woven together for the final draft of the story. f. Captions and Overlays: Enhance your visuals with concise captions that provide context and key details without overwhelming viewers. Consider using text overlays within the image itself for quick takeaways. g. Galleries: For longer visual stories, use image galleries, allowing users to swipe through images. h. Live Photos and GIFs: Leverage features like Live Photos (on iPhones) or short GIFs to add a sense of motion and dynamism to your visual content.
II. Captivating Visuals
a. High-Quality Images: Use high-resolution photos that look sharp and clear on smaller screens. Prioritise impactful images that capture the essence of the story. b. Eye-Catching Composition: Utilise strong composition techniques like leading lines and the rule of thirds to draw viewers into the image. c. Variety in Formats: Use photos of different formats like infographics and short video clips to keep content visually engaging and cater to different learning styles. Following these strategies can provide compelling image-based news experiences to users. Strong image-based stories and mobile-friendly content optimisation will make your platform popular among mobile users, and they will keep returning for more.
13.4.3 Packaging Video News
Videos are a powerful storytelling tool, and mobile offers a prime platform for

on-the-go news consumption. To create video content for mobile platforms, one Mobile News Packaging needs to understand some key features of this platform. Research proves that mobile users have limited attention spans; they don't tend to watch long videos, especially during working hours. In the early morning and late night, users watch long videos. Considering these facts, content creators focus on those "micro-moments" during working hours. Creating video content for mobile interfaces involves several key steps to ensure the videos are engaging and optimised for smaller screens.
I. Understand the basics
Video production is a multi-stage process. Whether making a film or creating video content for mobile platforms, you must understand the basics of video production, including pre-production, production, and post-production. a. Pre-production: This is the planning and preparation stage. At this stage, you brainstorm various ideas. As we discuss video content for mobile platforms, we must consider what works for shorter format videos. Further, after finalising the topic, we went into scriptwriting. The script provides an outline of the production, which includes dialogues and scene details. After these two steps, a storyboard is created, a visual representation of the script. At this stage, various camera shots and angles are finalised. b. Production: After pre-production, video content production starts. At this stage, shooting takes place. You must hire actors and complete the shooting if the script demands it. At this stage, sound recording of ambience sounds, dialogues, and sound effects is completed. c. Post-Production: After production, the last stage of video content is post-production. Video editors take all the raw footage and arrange it in sequence. If necessary, a voice-over is also given to elaborate the story. After all these stages, the final output is ready for users. II. Design for mobile After understanding the basics, the focus should be on the interface for creating content. As we are discussing creating video content for a mobile interface, we need to take care of certain things: a. Create short videos: Mobile users like to consume content on the go. Interfaces like Facebook reels, YouTube shorts, Instagram, and many other platforms are very popular among mobile users. These interfaces focus on providing content for those "micro-moments" when users want to consume content while waiting for a bus or metro or getting some time from work. Keep your videos concise and focused, ideally under 2 minutes. b. Impactful start: As a shorter video format, try to grab viewers' attention in the first two lines. Present the crux of the story early. Your content should have engaging visuals and sound. c. High-Quality Production: Maintain good audio and video quality, even if shot on smartphones. Use basic editing techniques for smooth

Mobile Journalism transitions and a polished look. Use visuals that complement the Production Process narrative, not just filler footage. Consider enhancing the story using a B-roll (supplemental footage) or creative camera angles. d. Clear and Concise Audio: Ensure clear audio with minimal background noise. Research also reveals that many users want to watch video content on mobile phones in silent mode. Consider using subtitles or captions for viewers watching in silent mode.
III. Optimising for Mobile Viewing
a. Vertical Video: As we know, the natural orientation of a mobile screen is portrait (vertical). Remember this when Shooting and editing videos in portrait (vertical) format. Go for landscape mode if you create video content for regular Facebook posts on walls or YouTube videos. But if you are creating content for Facebook reels, YouTube shorts, or Instagram, you must use portrait mode. b. Faster loading: Optimise video formats and file sizes for faster loading on mobile networks. Data-friendly options may be provided to users, allowing viewers to choose video quality based on their data plans.
IV. Engagement and Interactivity
Try to make your content more engaging and interactive. To do so, give users some options at the end of your videos, like sharing the story, subscribing for more content, or visiting your website for more videos. Apart from that, text can be used to describe the video, as users often watch content silently. Through text, highlight key points and provide additional context to the story. You can explore features like polls, quizzes, or interactive elements within the video player to increase audience engagement.
13.4.4 Packaging Audio News/Podcasting
Digital platforms have given impetus to a new form of content: podcasts. A podcast is audio content recorded and delivered to users through websites or mobile apps. In recent decades, podcasts have become very popular among users, and listening to podcasts is a normal routine. Pew Research Centre, in its report, says that about half of Americans listened to podcasts last year, and most of them came across news content. There are various kinds of news podcasts.
I. Types of News Podcasts
a. In-Depth Analysis: Podcasts offer more time than traditional news broadcasts. As internet-based content delivery, an issue can be discussed deeply through podcasts. This kind of programme is very popular among users. Research suggests that the majority of people find podcasts to be accurate. Pew Research Centre found that users trust the opinions shared through in-depth analysis. As podcasts offer more time, they provide a deeper understanding of complex stories, providing richer context and expert insights.

b. Diverse Perspectives: This news podcast feature differentiates it Mobile News Packaging from traditional news-sharing methods. When we listen to Radio, we have limited perspectives on the news. A podcast includes all the viewpoints related to an issue. These diverse perspectives give a clear picture of current events. c. IVR news: Many news organisations provide daily bulletins through Interactive Voice Recording (IVR). In IVR news, important news is recorded and shared with users. It can be done once or twice daily, depending on the users' demand. One of the benefits of IVR news is that it can be heard at any time. This is good for users who want concise updates on major headlines and for those who want a quick overview of current events. d. Interview: Interviews are a popular podcast format--people like listening to important personalities and getting an insight into their lifestyle. Now, podcasts are also being recorded and shared on video platforms to increase their visibility. Interviews with senior journalists, experts, policymakers, and political leaders will explore a specific topic in detail. e. Panel Discussions are also very popular among users. Organised panel discussions unite diverse voices on a single platform to debate current events and analyse complex issues from different angles. They provide various perspectives on an issue. f. News Satire and Commentary: Various research findings suggest that younger people listen to podcasts for entertainment. They love listening to light content while doing other important work or driving. This makes news satire and commentary an important format of podcasts. Humour and critical thinking provide an alternative perspective to the news.
II. Creating a News Podcast
a. Conceptualise podcast: It includes the focus of your news podcast. Will your podcast be a news bulletin or a specific issue? Will your podcast be a panel discussion or an interview? ConceptualisatioConceptualisationdentifying your ideal listener and tailoring your content to their interest and preferred formats. For Example, If your target audience is the younger generation, then the best-suited format would be satire or commentary, as young people are more interested in entertaining content. Choose a format that aligns with your goals. You may plan a news bulletin, panel discussion or interview. Ensure your content is informative, engaging, and well- sourced. A growing number of independent journalists and creators produce high-quality news podcasts on various topics. Podcasts can cater to specific interests, from politics and technology to science and healthcare, offering in-depth coverage for passionate audiences. b. Equipment for the podcast: Good podcasts include better audio quality. Invest in good microphones and editing software for professional production. Some popular podcasting microphones

Mobile Journalism include the Blue Yeti, Audio-Technica AT2020, and Shure SM7B. Production Process Use software to reduce ambient sound and improve audio quality. You can use Audacity or GarageBand to record and edit your episodes. For remote interviews, zoom or Skype can be used. Editing also removes mistakes when recording and inserting music and other audio elements. For editing, Adobe Audition is a good option. Free software like Audacity is also available. c. Promotion and Distribution: News organisations broadcast on websites or apps. However, if you create podcasts solely, you must distribute them through major directories like Apple, Spotify, and Google. It would help if you also considered monetising your comonetisinglore options like listener subscriptions, sponsorship, or partnership with news organisations. Prorganisationsur podcasts are equally important. Promote your podcasts through social media platforms. You may also create your websites or blogs to accompany your podcast.
13.5 SMARTPHONE FOR MOBILE MEDIA
PACKAGING
The mobile device is an indispensable tool in media content creation. It offers a suite of applications capable of performing a multitude of tasks. These compact powerhouses have features and applications that elevate storytelling to unprecedented levels.
13.5.1 Writing on Smartphones
Writing smartphone articles can be efficient with the right tools and practices. Mobile devices are capable of word processing and data editing. Microsoft offers mobile versions of Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, facilitating the creation and editing of text-based content directly on smartphones. Utilising audio techniques further expedites the content creation process. While writing on a mobile phone, one problem is distraction, such as getting a call or receiving notifications. To minimise these minimisers, you can use apps like Freedom, Focus Me, or Offtime to block distracting apps and notifications while writing. You should also not hesitate to use writing assistants. Tools like Grammarly can help you avoid casual language and ensure your writing is professional. If you want to use your smartphone for writing purposes, then you have to choose a smartphone that suits your writing needs. Some prefer a larger screen or physical keyboard to write long essays. For ease in writing, consider using a portable stand for your smartphone and an external keyboard for a better typing experience. If you feel uncomfortable typing on a small screen, take advantage of the voice-to-text feature of mobile phones.
13.5.2 Pictures and Audio/Video
228 Today's smartphones are capable of capturing high-resolution photos and

recording audio videos. Many news channels are dedicating some of their Mobile News Packaging news items to smartphones on which the story has been captured and edited. Several movies have also been shot entirely on smartphones to showcase their creative capabilities. Movies like Olive, 9 Rides, High Flying Birds, and many more are entirely shot on smartphones. a. High-Resolution Photography/Videography: Modern smartphones have high-resolution cameras capable of capturing high-resolution photos and videos. Now, creators can capture stunning visuals on the go without carrying bulky equipment. Mobile cameras offer a variety of shooting modes, filters, and effects, encouraging creative exploration. Creators can experiment with lighting conditions, angles, and built-in features to craft a unique visual narrative. b. Audio Recording: Smartphones have Integrated microphones, which enable content creators to capture clear audio for voice-over or ambient sound. These microphones can also be used for interviews. One can also attach external microphones for professional-grade audio recording. c. Contextual features: Mobile devices allow the capture of additional data. For example, geolocation tagging adds authenticity to the content, while weather data enriches stories related to environment or sports journalism.
13.5.3 Mobile Editing
Traditionally, video and photo editing is done on a desktop computer, for which specialised software is required. However, the rapid advancements in smartphone technology have also facilitated smartphone editing. Modern smartphones can capture high-resolution visuals and offer many editing tools at the user's fingertips. Smartphones have enabled users to produce high-quality content without bulky equipment or extensive technical knowledge. The accessibility and user-friendliness of mobile editing applications are fostering a new wave of content producers. These applications offer many features, making them suitable for novice and experienced content creators. Creators can edit their footage directly on smartphones and add music, sound effects, text overlays, and transitions. A variety of applications cater to different skill levels and editing needs. For Beginners, applications like InShot and Quik offer basic editing tools and templates, allowing users to create engaging media content quickly. Professional-grade applications like KineMaster and LumaFusion provide tools for expert editors who can use various editing parameters to create more professional content. Many mobile editing applications also use artificial intelligence (AI) to streamline editing. AI-powered features like automatic scene detection, smart trimming, and one-click filters allow users to achieve professional results with minimal effort.

Mobile Journalism 13.5.4 Value Addition and Sharing
Production Process
Through value addition like Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), we can create engaging experiences for mobile audiences. Mobile apps like Layar and Blippar unlock the potential of Augmented Reality (AR) storytelling. By integrating virtual elements into the physical environment, creators can offer interactive experiences that enhance user engagement. Platforms like Poll Everywhere allow creators to seamlessly integrate interactive elements like polls and quizzes within their content. This fosters a more participatory experience and boosts audience engagement. Mobile devices also provide instant access to various social media platforms, enabling creators to share their content directly with their target audience. Each platform caters to a specific user demographic, allowing creators to choose the most suitable platform based on format and style. Mobile-centric storytelling platforms like Spryto and Krock are also available and designed to create mobile content. These platforms integrate interactive elements, cater to diverse narrative styles, and provide targeted distribution options.
13.6 FUTURE OF MOBILE NEWS MEDIA
The field of Mobile media-based journalism is constantly expanding, and it is expected that it will continue to grow in the future. Mobile has been made to create content and share it with the users. It is also expected that constantly changing audience preferences and rapidly evolving new media technology have the potential to tap new audiences and provide a more immersive experience for readers and viewers. Let us discuss some emerging trends in mobile news media:
1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Virtual Reality (VR)
AR and VR-based stories promote immersive storytelling, allowing users to experience news events firsthand. AR and VR-based news could redefine news consumption and audience interactivity with the content. These kinds of content are particularly important for complex and remote stories for which real footage is unavailable. AI-powered news generation can also provide personalised news or even produce original news articles. While ethical concerns like accuracy and bias remain, they can give opportunities for the production of tailored content. AI-powered algorithms can also personalise new content, tailoring it according to individuals' interests. This raises concerns about filter bubbles and echo chambers, but at the same time, it provides opportunities for promoting diversity of viewpoints.
2. Interactive and Participatory content
A new trend in mobile media content is more user interactivity and participation in content generation. There has been a rise in interactivity-based content, where users contribute to content creation through polls, quizzes, and discussions. Content creators run quizzes and discussions on specific topics to increase

interactivity. There are various app-based platforms which enable journalists Mobile News Packaging to do this very conveniently. Based on the inputs received from users, content is created. These contents give a sense of community and allow diverse perspectives on an issue.
3. Targeting niche community
Mobile users are very interested in knowing about the incidents and events in their immediate surroundings. This user preference has added a new trend in content generation for mobile users. Now, hyper-local news platforms are on the rise. These platforms provide news and events in users' immediate surroundings. This new trend has strengthened the growing demand for localised content and also strengthened community connections. It is also supported by the increasing popularity of niche social media communities based on specific news topics or interests. Local area-based social media communities are also on the rise. Content creators are also targeting these niche communities for content generation. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How can smartphones be used for word and data processing?

2. Enumerate the role of AI and AR in the future of mobile computing?

13.7 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we learned about various trends and types of mobile news. These include text articles, image-based news, video news, and podcasting. We have also learnt how to create all these mobile media formats. We also learned about various software available for news writing and creating image-based and video content. Considering the short attention spans of mobile users, we also tried to understand how to create short content that provides information crisply. Mobile is undoubtedly becoming a content-sharing platform as consumers use their mobile devices to consume content. Keeping this in mind, we tried to understand the future of mobile news media. We understood various new trends that will shape mobile content formats. Mobile news media offers a powerful and convenient way to stay informed. Users can leverage this platform to stay dynamically and informatively engaged with current events by understanding its consumption trends, content formats, and future possibilities. 231

13.8 KEYWORDS
Production Process
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is used for gathering, storing, transmitting, and manipulating information. Mobile journalism: Creating and sharing news content using mobile devices. Mobile storytelling: Crafting narratives designed explicitly for consumption on mobile devices. News podcasts: Audio programs deliver news and information in an on- demand format. Infographics: Visual representations of data or information using charts, graphs, and illustrations. News apps: Mobile applications designed to deliver news content to users. Live streaming: Broadcasting video and audio content in real-time over the internet. Artificial intelligence (AI): Simulating human intelligence in machines for tasks like learning and problem-solving. Augmented reality (AR): Superimposing computer-generated images on a user's real-world view. Virtual Reality (VR) creates an immersive computer-generated environment that simulates a user's physical presence.
13.9 FURTHER READING
1. Adornato, A. (2021). Mobile and social media journalism: a practical guide
for multimedia journalism. Routledge.
2. Burum, I., & Quinn, S. (2015). MOJO: The mobile journalism handbook:
How to make broadcast videos with an iPhone or iPad. Routledge.
3. Duffy, A., Ling, R., Kim, N., Tandoc Jr, E., & Westlund, O. (Eds.), (2020),
Mobile News: Journalism's Shift from Fixed to Fluid. Routledge.
4. Westlund, O., & Quinn, S. (2018). Mobile journalism and MoJos. In Oxford
research encyclopaedia of communication.
13.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Today's smartphones are capable of capturing high-resolution photos and
recording audio videos. Many news channels are dedicating some of their news items to smartphones on which the story has been captured and edited. Several movies have also been shot entirely on smartphones to showcase their creative capabilities. Movies like Olive, 9 Rides, High Flying Birds, and many more are entirely shot on smartphones.

High-Resolution Photography/Videography: Modern smartphones have high- Mobile News Packaging resolution cameras capable of capturing high-resolution photos and videos. Now, creators can capture stunning visuals on the go without carrying bulky equipment. Mobile cameras offer a variety of shooting modes, filters, and effects, encouraging creative exploration. Creators can experiment with lighting conditions, angles, and built-in features to craft a unique visual narrative. Audio Recording: Smartphones have Integrated microphones, which enable content creators to capture clear audio for voice-over or ambient sound. These microphones can also be used for interviews. One can also attach external microphones for professional-grade audio recording. Contextual features: Mobile devices allow the capture of additional data. For example, geolocation tagging adds authenticity to the content, while weather data enriches stories related to environment or sports journalism.
2. AR and VR-based stories promote immersive storytelling, allowing users
to experience news events firsthand. AR and VR-based news could redefine news consumption and audience interactivity with the content. These kinds of content are particularly important for complex and remote stories for which real footage is unavailable. AI-powered news generation can also provide personalised news or even produce original news articles. While ethical concerns like accuracy and bias remain, they can give opportunities for the production of tailored content. AI-powered algorithms can also be used to personalise new content. AI can tailor the content according to individuals' interests. This raises concerns about filter bubbles and echo chambers, but at the same time, it provides opportunities for promoting diversity of viewpoints. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Writing smartphone articles can be quite efficient with the right tools
and practices. Mobile devices are capable of word processing and data editing. Microsoft offers mobile versions of Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, facilitating the creation and editing of text-based content directly on smartphones. Utilising audio techniques further expedites the content creation process. While writing on a mobile phone, one problem is distraction, such as getting a call or receiving notifications. To minimise these minimisers, you can use apps like Freedom, Focus Me, or Offtime to block distracting apps and notifications while writing. You should also not hesitate to use writing assistants. Tools like Grammarly can help you avoid casual language and ensure your writing is professional. If you want to use your smartphone for writing purposes, then you have to choose a smartphone that suits your writing needs. Some prefer a larger screen or physical keyboard to write long essays. For ease in writing, consider using a portable stand for your smartphone and an external keyboard for a better typing experience. If you feel uncomfortable typing on a small screen, take advantage of the voice-to-text feature of mobile phones.

Mobile Journalism 2. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Augmented Reality (AR) will significantly Production Process shape the future of mobile computing. AI will enhance user experiences by personalising interactions and learning from user behaviour, while also automating tasks and optimising app performance. Advanced security measures, such as biometric authentication and real-time threat detection, will be bolstered by AI, ensuring safer mobile experiences. AR will revolutionise interfaces, offering immersive and interactive applications across various fields like gaming, education, healthcare, and retail. Furthermore, AI will enable seamless integration with the Internet of Things (IoT), creating smarter and more connected ecosystems. Together, AI and AR will transform mobile computing, making it more intelligent, interactive, and integral to our daily lives.

UNIT 14 MOBILE EDITING AND
PRODUCTION
Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Need for Mobile Editing
14.3 Mobile Editing Workflow
14.3.1 Editing Plan
14.3.2 Types of Edits
14.4 Mobile Editing Applications for Video and Audio
14.5 Post-Production
14.5.1 Post-Production Apps
14.5.2 Export and Share
14.6 Let Us Sum Up
14.7 Keywords
14.8 Further Readings
14.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
As mobile journalism has become very popular, mojo reporters need to acquire the requisite skills for mobile editing and production. With technological advancements, a journalist with a smartphone can shoot, edit, and share stories on the go with unprecedented speed and ease. Mastering editing videos on one's smartphone is imperative for a mobile journalist today. A skilful reporter understands the capabilities of the device at hand, a smartphone or tablet, and possesses the necessary skill set to make the most of it. While smartphone cameras nowadays are quite advanced and have features to help you capture great footage, they also have built-in functions to help you with editing and post-production. A mobile journalist should get familiar with the functionalities of the smartphone or tablet and explore the wide array of apps that fulfil the purpose. Whether video or audio, numerous ways exist to create impressive mojo stories.
14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Understand the basics of mobile editing; * Understand the structure and flow of a mojo story;

Mobile Journalism * Edit news story on a smartphone; and
Production Process
* Know the apps for mojo editing and post-production.
14.2 NEED FOR MOBILE EDITING
While previous units have focused on how to write and shoot a mojo story, this Unit deals with the next step in the process, which involves editing and arranging the different elements thoughtfully to make an intelligible news package. There may be several ways to edit the video on a smartphone or tablet. Using a tablet may provide a bit of leverage as the bigger screen makes things less cumbersome yet does not hinder your mobility. Smartphones offer advanced features that make the move possible in a way akin to carrying a complete newsroom in your hand. As a journalist, mobile has made your work far easier and convenient. The editing needs may vary according to your story and platform. However, for any news story, the basic editing steps are more or less common, including trimming clips, adding transitions, effects, and filters to enhance the visual style and mood, incorporating graphics, text, and captions to provide context and information; and adding music, sound effects, and voice-overs to enrich the audio and convey emotion. Moreover, several other editing tools like crop, rotate, split-screen, freeze, lower thirds, watermark, etc., help improve the editing results.
14.3 MOBILE EDITING WORKFLOW
With a large spectrum of apps available for editing stories on mobile, you may believe that the gadget or the app is the dominant factor in compelling a story. However, notwithstanding the features of your gadget or the latest app in the market, smartphone editing is more about storytelling technique and understanding the perspective. You need to have a clear vision of the structure and flow of the story. Mobile devices with Android or iOS operating systems allow you to create B-roll smoothly, interview bites, record audio, add music and overlays, add transitions, text and graphics, and easily render and disseminate your stories instantaneously. While a journalist may capture great visuals and record amazing footage of an event, the story may have little to offer without careful editing and sequencing of shots. Poor editing is very likely to ruin an otherwise great story. Thus, a mobile journalist must set the right pace, tone, and flow of information in the story.
14.3.1 Editing Plan
It would help if you had a mental plan about the sequencing of a story right from the beginning. That would aid in the structure, which you would later flesh up with essential, appropriate information. While it may seem that editing a news story begins only after the shots have been captured, experts argue that the key to creating a great story is planning right from the inception of the idea in your mind. Even before stepping into the field, a rough sketch of your needed 236 content is ideal.

Robinson (2019) states that good story editing results from careful field Mobile Editing and preparation. The reporter should focus on the overall presentation, an interesting Production beginning and end, substantial content in the body and maintain a logical structure. As per Ivo Burum, the veteran mobile journalist, the story planning should follow a 'SCRAP' story development tool: * Story -- what is it, why am I telling it, and who is the audience? * Character -- who are the interviewees, and how will I use them in the edit? * Resolution -- what is the structure, and where will it take the story? * Actuality -- what actuality will I record, and what other elements will I need in the edit? * Production -- what are the logistics for filming and the editing? It is in sync with the five Ws of news reporting. By asking yourself these questions, you can decide the course of the story, evaluate what shots are available, what information is missing, and how the shots may be utilized in the best possible way. * To create an engaging story, a great idea is to think like the audience. The questions they might ask, the information they may want, and the order of the questions would help you decide on the story structure. It is recommended to start the edit with the most compelling elements in your arsenal. Use the best b-roll, actualities, natural sound-on-tape, music, and voice-over, and make optimum use of your strongest content. * The Story Cut: As Ivo Burum suggests, using two video tracks, V1 and V2, is advisable. This makes cutting the story on the first track (V1) easier and allows you to add a B-roll on the second track (V2). The process is more flexible as you can easily add and vary your B-roll wherever required. This way, your focus remains on the story, not the B-roll, as you work with the actualities and interview bites. The two tracks also enable an early edit of the B-roll, thus helping you make a fine cut as you move on. Burum advises going for checkerboard editing, where a checkerboard acts as a blueprint for the editing sequence. The image above shows how using a separate track (V2) for B-roll is preferable as it allows quick working with B-rolls, which may be a bit cumbersome if they are all edited on a single track (V1). You can also notice that the wide shot in the figure above can be extended or shortened in a single step, overlapping

Mobile Journalism the piece-to-camera or the interview. If you insert the wide shot into the gap Production Process between PTC1 and the interview, extending it would be more difficult as you also have to detach the audio of the PTC and interview. The second audio layer (A2) could either be left blank, or some music could be added here. L-cuts (where audio from one shot continues to the next) and J-cuts (where audio of the next shot begins before the shot changes) are also viable here as they give a more dynamic feel to the video. B-rolls and interview bites are edited in tandem. Often, B-rolls cover elements like an unwanted zoom or a whip pan and break the monotony of a long bite. They may be used judiciously to add perspective to what is being said or provide additional information. A B-roll can easily expand or compress a sequence. Take note of what the interviewee is talking about during the bite. Consider adding the visuals (read B-roll) after the bite starts, for example, after 10 seconds. You may show the B-roll for 10-15 seconds and return to the bite. The B-roll should contain visuals corresponding to the information being given in the interview. The cutting back and forth between the B-roll and bite will make the entire sequence more appealing. Ivo Burum suggests the following checkerboard for such editing of the B-roll: Voice-over is the next essential element of a news story. Writing and recording audio in Mojo usually happens on location. The narration can be recorded using an external microphone attached to your device or the camera app. The best idea to make your edits faster while you are on the move is to record narration as a video with audio. Take pertinent visuals (B-roll) or cover the camera lens with one hand and record the voice-over. This will make the clip appear black in your folder, and you won't find it difficult to locate your audio among the video clips. Also, you will have all your video and audio clips in the same folder, so you don't have to rummage through different locations on your smartphone to find them. You may not need a separate audio app to record your narration. Some experts say that recording on the in-built mic of an iPhone produces as good results as a professional mic. However, when locations are noisy, or the source cannot be approached close enough, this may not work. Natural sound-on-tape (natural location audio) is crucial for any story as it can be easily layered under a B-roll and aid in smooth transitions in the audio while editing. It is advisable to remember to record some location sounds.

* Fine Tuning: Ivo Burum suggests that the above process will give you a Mobile Editing and rough cut of your story. Once the B-roll is all set, you may produce the Production fine cut. The first thing is to look at your story again and note what you think needs some change at each crucial point of the story, right from the beginning to the middle to the end. After watching, you must decide to prune the edges of the shots (start or end). This trimming is required to remove any dead air after someone stops talking. Check on the placement and length of the B-roll at each point wherever it is used. Check whether you want to extend, shorten, or slide it across the timeline to achieve an impact. Also, narration can be reviewed for clarity, pace, or choice of words. If required, do not shy away from re-recording the voice-over. When making editing decisions, you must constantly ask yourself questions about where, why, and how to place the cut. A transition or cut should only be made where you have a valid reason. Always try to cut on. Do not wait for an action to be completed entirely. This keeps the story dynamic. Also, you must be courageous to dump those shots that add little or no value to your story. No matter if you took a shot with great effort, do not hesitate to remove it if it is only dragging the story and not contributing meaningfully. After all this is done, you are ready with the broadcast version of your story.
14.3.2 Types of Edits
While editing your stories in Mojo mostly requires the simple cut or fade as a transition, it is also pertinent to know that a variety of edits exist that can be utilised in the process:
1. Montage: A montage (a French term meaning 'assembling shots') involves
joining a series of shots to make a continuous sequence. The successive shots may be either completely in contrast or similar. The shots are usually quick-paced (fast-cutting) and short, demonstrating visual variety and giving the video a vibrant touch.
2. Jump Cut: A jump cut is a transition that looks like a technical mistake if
not placed meaningfully. Removing some frames from a continuous shot can achieve a jump cut. This gives the impression of the subject instantly jumping forward in time. It is often shown to depict the passage of time. The shot composition and camera angle are usually the same, with only slightly changing the subject's position. Jump cuts are also often utilised to create high-energy montages. They may also convey psychological state or emotional disturbance.
3. L-Cut: An L-cut is one where the previous shot's sound overlaps the next
shot's video. The editing timeline appears to be in the shape of an L. That's why it is called L-cut. An L-cut may be used to suggest the thoughts of a subject, flashbacks, voice-over montages, one-on-one dialogue scenes, or the ending of a story.
4. J-Cut: A J-cut is one where the sound from the next shot starts before the
video of the next shot appears. The editing timeline appears to be in the shape of a J. That's why it is called J-cut. These can be used to make the

Mobile Journalism dialogue flow more natural or to create intrigue in the viewer's mind about Production Process what is coming next. Sometimes, they can be used as an opening shot of a story. A J-cut is also used to make the sound/audio more significant by making it detached from the video.
5. Cutting on action: Editors often cut the shot at a point when the action is
mid-way. The reason is to make the resulting sequence look more active and paced-up. Waiting for an action to be complete would result in a rather unappealing sequence. The editing is done to match the action in one shot to that in the next one--for example, a mid-shot of a man moving his hand towards the door knob to open it. Then, there is a close shot of the hand turning the doorknob, followed by a full shot of the man entering a room.
6. Parallel Editing: When two (or more) actions unfolding simultaneously
are intercut, it is parallel editing. Also called cross-cutting, this technique involves cutting back and forth between two elements in the same story, giving the sense of two different things happening simultaneously.
7. Matched Cut: A cut where two completely different shots are joined to
match each other in look or style. The two shots may be matched using similar objects, actions, colours, shapes, or dialogue. Such transition creatively augments the meaning of the sequence, creating a seamless storyline. One of the most popular examples is Hitchcock's depiction of water swirling down the drain in the movie Psycho, which is matched with the murdered girl's eye. It creates a link between life draining out of the girl's body and the bloody water flowing into the shower drain.
Name Device OS Free Version Paid Features
Subscription Adobe Premier Android Free basic Adobe Rush Auto duck music, Rush and iOS version Premium pro cloud sync, in-built templates KineMaster Android Free basic Paid Premium Transitions, effects, and iOS version with version audio, multi-layered watermark editing PowerDirector Android Free basic Paid version for Supports 4K, Motion and iOS version the latest features tracking, several editorial tools Filmora Android Free basic Paid Premium Variety of edit tools and iOS version with version and stock library watermark Funimate Android Free basic Paid PRO version Creative animation Video Editor and iOS version with and special effects watermark Quik Android Free basic Paid premium Powerful editing tools, and iOS version version automatic edit Splice Android Free basic Paid premium Supports 4K, powerful and iOS version version editing and animation Viva Video Android Free basic Paid premium Wide range of editing and iOS version with version features yet simple watermark InShot Android Free basic Paid premium Professional basic and iOS version with version video editing features watermark

Mobile Editing and
Magisto Android Free basic Paid premium Uses advanced AI to Production and iOS version with version create professional watermark videos Luma Fusion Android Free basic Paid premium Powerful editing tools and iOS version with version and effects watermark VN Android Free basic In-app purchases Advanced Editor with and iOS version with rich text templates no watermark iMovie iOS only Free A wide array of powerful editing tools Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the SCRAP tool for planning your mojo story.

2. Differentiate between L-cut and J-cut.

14.4 MOBILE EDITING APPLICATIONS FOR
VIDEO AND AUDIO
Smartphones have shrunk the recording studios to fit in our back pockets. Mojo work relies a lot on a wide range of apps, from recording to editing and sharing your work. Tech markets are abuzz with numerous apps suitable for journalists practising Mojo and creating stories in a flash. Some of the popular video editing apps trending among mobile journalists are listed below: Audio editing apps: It is vital to edit the audio in your story, whether it is an interview, sound bite, ambient sound, voice-over, or simply any other music. You must trim the beginning and end of interviews and other distractions and noise that you must fix. Some popular audio editing apps, both free and paid, have been listed below:
1. Wave Editor
2. Wondershare Filmora
3. Audio Lab
4. WavePad
5. Voice PRO

Mobile Journalism 6. Audio Evolution Mobile Studio
Production Process
7. FL Studio
8. Adobe Podcast
9. Dolby On
14.5 POST-PRODUCTION
Post-production is significant because it provides the final finishing touch to your video. The storyline you created through your shots and audio needs further touch-ups to complete and seal the edges. That's where post-production comes in. The video may need some colour correction somewhere, or you may want to give additional information through graphics or text. As a journalist, you may file or publish the story with simple edits without much polishing in mojo work. However, if time allows, you may refine by adding supers to identify interviewees, data, figures, or even subtitles.
14.5.1 Post-Production Apps
For post-production, numerous options are available with different apps, rendering you a beautifully packaged story. Some of the popular ones are listed below:
1. Adobe Premiere Rush: This app offers a wonderful editing workspace
for smartphone editing. In addition to trimming clips, arranging shots in great sequences, and adding narration and music, you may add transition graphics, insert titles, and overlays. You can add a new transition graphic clip or an overlay to your timeline at the playhead's location. You can also adjust colour and speed, add music saved on your device, or choose from the app's soundtracks, sound effects, and loops. You can quickly create a picture-in-picture with Premiere Rush with three simple steps for news stories. First, select a base video on track V1. Then, select the second video and stack it on the second track, V2 (on top of track V1). Adjust its size (shrink it to a small picture in one corner) and place it wherever you want. Premiere Rush allows editing four video layers, V1 to V4, and three audio layers, A1-A3, in one go. However, in Mojo, you often use two video layers and one or two audio layers. You may use the Audio tool to increase or decrease the volume of your audio file and customize other audio adjustments. Adding text is also effortless in Rush, something you can achieve in a few easy clicks. The Edit panel allows you to customize the text the way you want. The title panel also has several customizable pre-built templates. You can add your desired animation to the title as well.
2. Luma Fusion: The paid subscription comes with 'Storyblocks for
LumaFusion', a media library offering a repository of royalty-free videos, animated backgrounds, music and sound effects.

Another feature that makes this app a favourite among users is the ability to edit Mobile Editing and multiple video and audio tracks simultaneously. Up to 6 videos and six audio Production tracks supporting 4 K videos can be edited. However, roughly two videos and two audio tracks are generally sufficient for journalistic work. Text can be easily added to videos in various ways. A text clip or title can be chosen and added by dragging and dropping it on the video track. Further, it can be customised using the presets and templates available to create a fancier look. Double-tapping the text clip allows you to change settings like opacity, font, size, etc. Luma Fusion allows you to insert a shot or clip anywhere into your timeline and replace shots or their parts. Adding transitions with professional finesse is also quite straightforward. It is a great tool for a mojo reporter who has to accomplish his task in the least possible time. Colour corrections are also easy to achieve. Simply double-clicking a clip, you can enter the Editor, which gives you access to 'Color and Effects'. The 'Green Screen' effect can achieve the chroma key function. Once a key value is set, the image on the track below the timeline will show wherever that value is present in the selected image. Key effects can be applied before or after other colours and effects. Different effects can be combined and applied to videos, photos, and titles. The best part is that a quick fix can be made at the story assembly stage if needed. Luma Fusion offers a powerful tool for live audio mixing that is very handy for mobile journalists. Audio ducking allows the music or other soundtrack to be automatically lowered when a source gives a bite on a separate audio track. Frame and Fit Editor can create picture-in-picture (PnP), ideal for mojo stories.
3. I Movie: A sturdy app for smartphone editing, iMovie is usually pre-
installed on almost all Apple devices. It is one of the favourite apps among mojo practitioners. In addition to basic editing, this app offers features for post-production to polish your news stories. Adding and editing the B-roll is smooth with this app. The main video clip is added to the first track, and the plus icon is selected to add the B-roll immediately. Locating your desired footage (B-roll), tap it, and you will get some options, from which you click the three dots and select cutaway. This will stack your B-roll above the main track, and you can edit it further, expand it, or compress it as needed. iMovie also offers Picture in Picture (PinP), which places one clip over and anywhere on the main track. A split-screen effect can also be used when adding a clip of an interviewee. As the source talks with the reporter, the screen can show the reporter and the source side-by-side. The reporter/source can also be shown along with the B-roll. In such cases, split-screen is a good tool. For the chroma key, select the desired clip and click Add media. From the pop- up, choose the green screen clip. Tap three dots and select green/blue screen, followed by Auto. This will remove the background and replace it with a

Mobile Journalism background of your choice. The background clip's length can be trimmed and Production Process adjusted to match your main clip. The app enables four audio and music tracks--the video clip's audio track -- to be edited, mixed, or split. The video-embedded track can also be detached using the 'detach' option.
4. Filmora Wondershare: Filmora is user-friendly and suitable for mojo
work, as you can instantly film, edit and share your stories. Text and titles can be added by dragging and dropping directly on the timeline. While you can vary the duration of text visibility on your video clip, you may also add various effects to the title. The Text editing panel lets you change your text's font, size, alignment, colour, and settings. Advanced text editing helps you add more elements to your title effects. Filmora Split Screen video tool can help you show differently angled shots side- by-side and make comparisons, which is very useful for news videos. You can use the Split Screen preset, which involves importing clips to your library and dragging them to the preview window. Further, colour corrections, animations, and other adjustments can also be made to each video on the split screen.
14.5.2 Export and Share
The final step in the editing process is exporting the video. This step is significant as it determines how the video will finally be viewed and shared. Export in video editing means converting an edited video into a format that enables it to be watched on different platforms and devices. It involves compressing the video size, encoding it to a specific format such as MP4, MOV, Mkv, AVI, etc., and then saving it to a chosen location. The video quality, compatibility, and size depend on the export settings selected. Different apps allow users to export edited videos in various formats, resolutions, and frame rates. The intended platform for the video to be shared is a crucial factor in deciding the settings. A video meant for digital platforms may have a different format from the one designed for broadcast television. For example, on Filmora Wondershare, you can either export and save the video on your device or share it directly on various social media platforms in a few steps. After you complete your editing, tap the Export option. The Export Settings will be prompted. Choose the desired resolution and FPS (frames per second) and tap Continue Export. The export process may take some time, and the video will be saved directly to the phone's gallery. The app will allow you to share it on various social media platforms, which you can choose accordingly. Similarly, videos can be exported and shared through various editing apps. For instance, Adobe Premiere Rush renders your video in the export settings you choose and saves it in the location of your choice. You may also choose Advanced Settings to meet any specific requirements.

You can also directly sign into your social media accounts like YouTube, Mobile Editing and Facebook, Instagram, or others through Premiere Rush and pitch your stories Production immediately. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss how the iMovie app can achieve the chroma key effect.

2. Explain what is meant by exporting a video.

3. List some video file formats used in Mojo.

14.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed the concept of mobile editing and production used by mobile journalists, as smartphones have emerged as complete newsrooms in themselves. We discussed how a mojo plans a news story, from the idea's conception to its final production. We learned how to create the first edit of a story, which leads to the fine cut and placement of shots and audio. We also discussed various editing apps used for editing and post-production and how to export and share stories on various platforms.
14.7 KEYWORDS
B-roll refers to the shots that support the main storyline. The supplemental footage shot outside the primary footage (A-roll) can cover transitions, set the tone, break monotony, or mask errors. Actuality refers to the live or recorded information from a scene or a bite on location. It could be an interview of a source who may provide key information about the news story. A watermark is a type of symbol, logo, or visible overlay on a video that marks the ownership or brand of the tool used to create that work. These are usually

Mobile Journalism semi-transparent and superimposed onto a piece of work, usually appearing in Production Process the foreground of a video. Premium is an app that must be purchased before being used. Such versions unlock the full potential of software that is not available on free or basic versions.
14.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Burum, I., & Quinn, S. (2016). MOJO: The Mobile Journalism Handbook.
Routledge.
2. Burum, I. (2021). The Mojo Handbook Theory to Praxis. Routledge.
3. Horrocks, S. (November 10, 2018). 5 Best Editing Apps for Android
Phones. Retrieved February 10, 2024, from https://momofilmfest.com/ editing-apps-for-android-phones/
4. Horrocks, S. (November 10, 2018). 5 Best Editing Apps for iPhone.
Retrieved February 10, 2024, from https://momofilmfest.com/best-editing- apps-for-iphone/
5. Joseph, S. M. (July 26, 2023). How to write, shoot and edit a film on
mobile. Retrieved February 10, 2024 from https://www.videomaker. com/how-to/planning/organization/how-to-write-shoot-and-edit-a-film- on-mobile/#:~:text=Doing%20basic%20edits%20on%20your,app%20 like%20Filmora%20Video%20Editor.
6. Montgomery, R. (2020). Mobile Journalism. Independently Published.
14.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The SCRAP tool comprises the following questions:
* Story -- what is it, why am I telling it, and who is the audience? * Character -- who are the interviewees, and how will I use them in the edit? * Resolution -- what is the structure, and where will it take the story? * Actuality -- what actuality will I record, and what other elements will I need in the edit? * Production -- what are the logistics for filming and the editing?
2. An L-cut is one where the previous shot's sound overlaps the next shot's
video. A J-cut is one where the sound from the next shot starts before the video of the next shot appears. Check Your Progress: 2
1. For the chroma key, select the desired clip and click Add Media. From the
pop-up, choose the green screen clip. Tap three dots and select green/blue screen, followed by Auto. This will remove the background and replace it with a background of your choice. The background clip's length can be 246 trimmed and adjusted to match your main clip.

2. The final step in the editing process is exporting the video, which determines Mobile Editing and
how it will be viewed and shared. In video editing, export means converting Production an edited video into a format that enables it to be watched on different platforms and devices.
3. Different video file formats are MOV, Mkv, MP4, FLV, and AVI.


======================================================================
=== SOURCE: MNM-035E.pdf ===
======================================================================

BNM-023
Indira Gandhi National Open University
School of Journalism and New Media Studies
MEDIA AND INFORMATION LITERACY
School of Journalism and New Media Studies
Indira Gandhi National Open University
New Delhi

EXPERT COMMITTEE
Prof. K.S. Arul Selvan Prof. Pradeep Nair Prof. Bidisha Chaudhuri
Director, SOJNMS - Chairperson Department of Communication, IIIT Bangalore
Central University of HP,
Dharamshala Prof. B. P. Sanjay Prof. Vigneshwara Illavarasan Prof. Subodh Kesharwani Former Vice-Chancellor, CUTN, IIT Delhi, New Delhi Director, Center for Online
Thiruvarur Education, IGNOU
Prof. Subhash Dhulia Prof. P. V. Suresh Dr. Krishna Shankar Kusuma Former Professor, SOJNMS, Director, School of Computer and Associate Professor of IGNOU, New Delhi [and Former Information Sciences, IGNOU Communication, JMI, New Delhi
Vice-Chancellor, Uttarakhand
Open University]
Mr. Alok Verma Ms. Mahalakshmi Jayaram Deputy Mr. Amit Gupta Independent Journalist, Senior Editor, The Hindu, Chennai Senior Assistant Editor, Aaj Tak
New Delhi Digital, New Delhi
Dr. Ramesh Yadav Prof. Shambhu Nath Singh Prof. O. P. Dewal Associate Professor, SOJNMS, Former Director, SOJNMS, IGNOU Professor, SOJNMS, IGNOU
IGNOU
Dr. Padmini Jain Dr. Shikha Rai Dr. Amit Kumar
Assistant Professor, SOJNMS, Associate Professor, SOJNMS, Assistant Professor, SOJNMS,
IGNOU IGNOU IGNOU
Dr. Usha Chander
Research Officer, SOJNMS,
IGNOU
COURSE COORDINATOR: Prof. K.S. Arul Selvan
COURSE PREPERATION TEAM
Unit-1 Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan Unit-9 Dr. Piyashi Dutta, Block Editor:
SOJNMS, IGNOU, Faculty of Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan
IGNOU, New Delhi Communication, Amity Professor, SOJNMS,
IGNOU, New Delhi
University, Noida
Madhumita Das,
SOJNMS, IGNOU
Unit-2 Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan Unit-10 Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan
SOJNMS, IGNOU, SOJNMS, IGNOU,
IGNOU, New Delhi IGNOU, New Delhi
Madhumita Das, Aakriti Taneja,
SOJNMS, IGNOU SOJNMS, IGNOU
Unit-3 Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan Unit-11 Swati Arjun, Senior
SOJNMS, IGNOU, Researcher, Observer
IGNOU, New Delhi Research Foundation,
New Delhi
Aakriti Taneja,
SOJNMS, IGNOU
Unit-4 Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan Unit-12 Swati Arjun, Senior
SOJNMS, IGNOU, Researcher, Observer
IGNOU, New Delhi Research Foundation,
New Delhi
Ashuni Pou,
SOJNMS, IGNOU
Unit-5 Anjulika Ghoshal Unit-13 Vijay Soni, Deputy
Department of Journalism Editor, Open Magazine,
and Mass Communication, Delhi
Doon University, Dehradun
Unit-6 Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan Unit-14 Dr. Rachna Sharma,
SOJNMS, IGNOU, Associate Professor,
IGNOU, New Delhi IIMC, New Delhi

Unit-7 Prof. K. S. Arul Selvan Unit-15 Dr. Sonali Srivastav,
SOJNMS, IGNOU, Faculty of
IGNOU, New Delhi Communication, NIFT,
Mohali, Haryana
Unit-8 Adopted from SOJNMS, Unit-16 Dr. Sonali Srivastav,
IGNOU Faculty of
Communication, NIFT,
Mohali, Haryana
Print Production: Mr. Sanjay Aggarwal, Assistant Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi December, 2023
Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2023
ISBN :
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. Further information about the School of Management Studies and the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University's office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi-110 068. Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the The Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU. Laser Typesetting : Akashdeep Printers, 20-Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi-110002 Printed at :

Course Contents
Pages
COURSE INTRODUCTION 7
Block 1 Understanding MIL 9
Unit 1 Understanding Media and Information Literacy 13
Unit 2 MIL, Civic Participation and Right to Information 32
Unit 3 Interacting with Media and Other Content Providers 47
Unit 4 MIL, Teaching and Lifelong Learning 65
Unit 5 Communication and Information, Teaching and Learning 84
Block 2 MIL, Society and Ethics 99
Unit 6 Learning Theories and MIL 103
Unit 7 Enabling Environment for MIL in Learning Spaces 119
Unit 8 Audience: National and Global Contexts 138
Unit 9 Technology, Media and Society 154
Unit 10 Freedom, Ethics and Social Accountability 170
Block 3 Journalism and Society 187
Unit 11 What Makes News 191
Unit 12 The News Development Process 212
Unit 13 News Reporting and The Power of the Image 237
Block 4 Representation in India 253
Unit 14 Industry Codes on Diversity and Representation 257
Unit 15 Television, Films, Print Publishing 275
Unit 16 Representation and Music Videos 288

COURSE INTRODUCTION:
MEDIA AND INFORMATION LITERACY
An individual spends nearly five hours daily with mobile/computing devices. Besides that, s/he shares considerable time with the other media platforms. This is a substantial amount of interactions with the media and communication by an individual compared to their share of time with the family, school, peers, etc. Individuals largely spend more time with entertainment content, followed by news programmes. Both these genres carry many sponsored advertisements interlaced with these media contents. The important point here is that all these media contents are "manufactured" with the help of various professionals and, on top of it, with the instructions/directions from the decision-making bodies/persons from the media institutions. This whole operation is consciously done to maximise the profit. Media is a conduit between sponsors and audience. Eyeballs are the row stock that helps media institutions flourish. Besides profits, most media institutions maintain a symbiotic relationship with the power centres. This association helps all the stakeholders enjoy immense benefits in their respective areas of operations. Manufactured content for commercial profit and a symbiotic relationship with the power centres require adequate "adjustments" in the media treatment of its messages/contents. As we all know, an individual's opinion and knowledge system are influenced mainly directly or indirectly by the media and communication systems. Every sphere of our life requires informed decisions that make an intended betterment for an individual. That benefit largely enhances the quality of life of their immediate community and the larger society. Now, you can relate the association between the media's role in decision-making through opinion formation among individuals. Individuals should not become puppets of the media's hidden agenda if any exists in their operations. Individual media users should be aware of this intricate relationship and its consequences. This particular awareness is the outcome of being media literate. This course, Media and Information Literacy (MIL) is meant to give you the required learning to understand all the dimensions of the media and communication system needed to acquire skills and competencies of media literacy. This course is divided into four blocks, the details of which are provided below. Block 1 Understanding MIL provides a comprehensive orientation on acquiring skills and competencies to understand the media and communication systems. Unit 1, Understanding Media and Information Literacy, explains the basic tenets of MIL.
Unit 2 MIL, Civic Participation and Right to Information describes the role of media
literacy in civic and political engagement and how a user can participate in public welfare with the help of media literacy skills. The various options for media participation are described in Unit 3, Interacting with Media and Other Content Providers. Unit 4: MIL, Teaching and Life-Learning introduces the concept of Lifelong Learning and its crucial connection to Media and Information Literacy (MIL) by emphasising its role as an ongoing process throughout an individual's life. Unit 5, Communication and Information, Teaching and Learning, explores communication in the digital era by comprehensively examining Information Exchange and Knowledge Sharing in today's digital landscape, elucidating their significance and impact.

Block 2 MIL, Society and Ethics, explores the role of media literacy in teaching- learning processes. The previous block taught about media, and in this block, you will learn more about teaching through media. Besides that, you will understand the role of various stakeholders in the media and communication processes and how these processes are linked with multiple social institutions. Unit 6: Learning Theories and MIL discusses theories for how individuals acquire knowledge and understanding as they grow, the importance of social interaction in learning, the role of observation and modelling in learning, and the mental processes involved in acquiring knowledge.
Unit 7: Enabling Environment for MIL in Learning Spaces uncovers the diverse and
enlightening experiences of MIL educational interventions worldwide by tracing the rich history and practices of MIL education. Unit 8: Audience: National and Global Contexts stresses understanding audiences as it remains essential in shaping effective media strategies and communication practices. Unit 9: Technology, Media and Society explores the relationship between technology and society. More importantly, it explains the demands for vigilance in combating misinformation, protecting privacy, and bridging digital divides. Unit 10: Freedom, Ethics and Social Accountability explores these critical themes, emphasising the ethical values and responsibilities that underpin MIL in an era where information and media play pivotal roles in our lives and society. Block 3 Journalism and Society: Media is considered a powerful institution; it is prone to influence by the various power centres besides its commercial operations. Bias, subjectivity, hidden agendas, and favouritism are some significant criticisms. Regular news readers should be familiar with the entire news operation. This block will take you through the nuances of news operations. Unit 11: What Makes News explores the concepts, criteria, and challenges that underpin the news-making process, shedding light on how information becomes news in a dynamic and evolving media landscape.
Unit 12: The News Development Process helps you explore the intricate world of
news production, its stages, key players, and the evolving landscape in various media formats. Unit 13: News Reporting and the Power of the Image explores the news reporting process and images' influential role, emphasising the importance of ethical practices and evolving skills in journalism. Block 4 Representation in Media: This block will take you through many shades of the crucial aspects of media operations, which will help you broaden your understanding of media institutions. Unit 14: Industry Codes on Diversity and Representation: highlights the significance of these Industry Codes of Diversity and Representation, shedding light on their role in fostering a more inclusive and representative media landscape. Unit 15: Television, Films, Print Publishing: issues of representation in television, films, advertising, and print publishing are explored along with the technical strategies employed, the impact of representation on culture, and the ongoing efforts to promote more diverse, inclusive, and responsible media portrayals.
Unit 16: Representation and Music Videos deals with the cultural aspects and technical
elements of music videos, emphasising their role in reflecting and shaping the values, trends, and expressions of Indian society. Media and information systems are indispensable and metaphorically considered a "double-edged sword". We must handle the media system more critically for our betterment. This course will give adequate understanding to achieve it.

Block-1
Understanding MIL

BLOCK 1: UNDERSTANDING MIL
The first block of the course, Media and Information Literacy, explains the basic tenets of media literacy. We must handle these entities meaningfully with the abundance of media outlets and information sources. Knowing the merits and demerits as well as the advantages and disadvantages of media and information sources is crucial in the contemporary scenario. The primary reasons for media literacy requirements are that media and information are primarily profit-oriented and susceptible to many biases. Secondly, with the advent of digital media, individuals need to participate responsibly. The first block will provide foundations to understand all the intricate matters to apply media literacy in your day-to-day affairs.
Unit 1: Understanding Media and Information Literacy (MIL)
This unit introduces the concept of Media and Information Literacy (MIL), focusing on its significance and intricacies. In this era defined by information abundance, media entities and content providers wield substantial influence in shaping our beliefs, perceptions, and actions. Proficiency in MIL is not merely advantageous but imperative for responsible engagement with the modern information landscape. This unit serves as a comprehensive guide to MIL. It explores the concept of media convergence and meticulously defines MIL. Subsequently, it scrutinizes the constituent elements of MIL and elucidates the fundamental competencies required for attaining media and information literacy. Furthermore, it pivots towards an in-depth examination of MIL within the Indian context, shedding light on stakeholders and elucidating its tangible benefits. The multifaceted dimensions of MIL, encompassing Media Literacy and Digital Literacy, are dissected, given their pertinence in the contemporary digital milieu. The unit also emphasizes the pivotal aspects of comprehending information sources and discerning the diverse audiences one may encounter. To enhance the educational experience, a spectrum of pedagogical approaches that facilitate the acquisition of MIL expertise is also provided.
Unit 2: MIL, Civic Participation and Right To Information
This unit explores the connection between civic participation, Media and Information Literacy (MIL), and Indian citizenship, and it begins by examining the importance of civic participation and how MIL contributes to informed citizenship in India. It discusses the strategies for fostering civic participation, emphasizing education and media. Examining civic participation in various settings, including communities and classrooms, reveals their roles in shaping democratic values. The unit delves into civic media literacy, its core elements, and adaptation to the digital era. It also discusses the Right to Information and the complex relationship among citizens, media, and democracy, including journalism's role, press freedom, editorial independence, and media pluralism. Thus, it attempts to shed light on civic participation, MIL, and engaged citizenship in India.
Unit 3: Interacting with Media and Other Content Providers
This unit explores Content Creation and Curation, systematically unravelling intricate facets of media and information. Content providers play a pivotal role in shaping the media landscape. The focus is on the mechanics of "how" content is created using sophisticated technologies that shape the content permeating daily lives. Equally imperative is "why". Ownership and media economics influences and determines the

Understanding MIL information and perspectives disseminated. Understanding "who" in content creation emphasizes the criticality of effectively targeting the intended audience. Representation in media and information becomes central, encompassing myriad forms of content and intricate portrayals through denotation and connotation. And eventually, fostering a profound understanding of how it moulds perceptions and interactions within an ever- evolving world. Within the realm of Production/User-Generated Content, this unit demarcates between audiences, users, and producers, giving due consideration to agency, authority, and autonomy integral to producing user-generated content. Concurrently, it also discusses the rights of communication and expression in this mediascape.
Unit 4: MIL, Teaching and Lifelong Learning
This unit introduces the concept of Lifelong Learning and its crucial connection to Media and Information Literacy (MIL) by emphasizing its role as an ongoing process throughout an individual's life. There are key characteristics that define this lifelong pursuit of knowledge. An intrinsic relationship and interdependence between MIL and Lifelong Learning underscores how MIL contributes to teaching and learning processes. There are various learning contexts where MIL plays a pivotal role, including formal education, non-formal education, informal education, and special education. The facilitation of MIL skills depends on the pedagogy of MIL, encompassing the instructional process, the role of instructors, and pedagogical methods. Finally, it is important to understand MIL and Lifelong Learning within the Indian context, shedding light on their significance within the Indian educational framework. Throughout this unit, a comprehensive understanding of the interplay between Lifelong Learning and MIL provides valuable insights for personal and professional growth.
Unit 5: Communication and Information, Teaching and Learning
The unit explores communication in the digital era by comprehensively examining Information Exchange and Knowledge Sharing in today's digital landscape, elucidating their significance and impact. The nuances of communication in learning spaces are imperative and emphasize the pivotal role of educators in facilitating effective communication. MIL skills and competencies are necessary for meaningful communication in the digital age. The unit explores information in the Digital Age and media Literacy, where the context and concepts surrounding digital information are elucidated, along with an exploration of the evolving Information Culture. It also focuses on engagement with digital technology for pedagogical development, focusing on Technology intervention and MIL, critical thinking and decision-making abilities, and learning styles enhanced by digital tools. With this foundational understanding, you can explore the nuances and dimensions of media literacy in specific domain areas in the subsequent blocks.

UNIT 1 UNDERSTANDING MEDIA AND
Information Literacy
INFORMATION LITERACY (MIL)
Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Role of Media and Other Content Providers
1.4 Concepts of Media and Information Literacy (MIL)
1.4.1 Convergence
1.4.2 Definition of MIL
1.4.3 Components of MIL
1.4.4 MIL Competencies
1.5 MIL in India: Stakeholders and Benefits
1.6 Dimensions of MIL
1.6.1 Media Literacy
1.6.2 Digital Literacy
1.7 Understanding the Source and the Receiver
1.7.1 Sourcing Information
1.7.2 Audience
1.8 Pedagogical Approaches
1.9 Let Us Sum Up
1.10 Keywords
1.11 Further Readings
1.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Information has been proven essential for the growth of individuals and communities and the nation's development. We get daily information from various sources such as libraries, television, and online communication organisations. Therefore, we acquire information from multiple sources such as books, media, and historical records. Contemporary chords of the same information must support the received information. To insert new knowledge, we gain further information to maintain our social lives. Nevertheless, access to information should not be confused with acquiring information management skills. Information is produced as a message and delivered via a medium (e.g., text, audio, visual, image) to the target audience. Sometimes, the message is formed deliberately to achieve specific goals, but we ignore its causes and consequences. Hence, we need to negotiate the message or information carefully. The power of reasoning within us can answer what, when, why, who, where, and how in every information piece we receive. The opulence of information provides an opportunity to know about new inventions, the progress of humankind in places, disasters, and many other necessary facts that

Understanding MIL would not be possible without information providers. However, at the same time, it also brings challenges to us. For example, the digital era has turned us into digital information consumers who have brought more risks. There are multiple sources of information on digital platforms; in some cases, the producers deliberately produce fake news, misinformation, and disinformation, and we start believing the information as truth. Media critics frequently question the objectivity and credibility of news. How do we know about the truthfulness of a piece of information? How do we know the source is trustworthy? How can we gather alternative views? What do we do with the information? People need the ability to make better decisions over information spaces, and the ability is called Media and Information Literacy. In this unit, we will discuss the role of MIL in empowering people regarding the concept of 'Media and Information Literacy (MIL)'.
1.2 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: identify the normative roles of content providers such as libraries, archives, media, and digital sources; understand the convergence of media literacy and information literacy; explore the concept of MIL and its branches; and locate the place of media and information literacy in people's lives and understand its importance.
1.3 ROLE OF MEDIA AND OTHER CONTENT
PROVIDERS
Information is essential in modern society; hence, the function of information providers is in demand. Almost every minute, we get information from various sources such as television channels, newspapers, online news portals, social media, or libraries in different forms. There are two significant forms of information: media content and non-media content. Media content is the content produced by media in the form of a media message. Media content can be further divided into two branches: news media content and non- news media content. News media houses produce news media content based on journalistic values, which provide authentic and credible information following the elements of news such as timeliness, conflict, prominence, proximity, and human interest. For example, the news content found in newspapers, television news channels, and online news portals is called news media content. Non-news media contents are found in the form of media text, visual or audio-visual form but do not follow journalistic values or elements of news. We can find these forms in radio, television, and publications. For example, movies, advertisements, television serials, and radio dramas are produced in the forms of media and considered non-news media content. Thus, we can easily distinguish between news and non-new media content providers. Archives, libraries, museums, and online sources (other than news) can be recognised as non-media content providers. Besides, citizens who produce content such as vlogs or blogs are non-media content providers. The critical apprehension can be applied to

all forms of content irrespective of the kinds of content providers. The normative roles Understanding Media and
Information Literacy
of media and non-media, both content providers, fall under the critical evaluation. The content providers are expected to: Provide information about issues of local, national, and international importance. Provide valuable information in facilitating the democratic development of a country. Help evaluate public debates and make informed decisions. Act as a bridge between government and citizens. Help understand society and contemporary issues, thus building a sense of belonging. Keep a check on governmental works, corruption, and corporate malpractice, thus creating transparency in public life. Function in promoting the right to freedom of expression and pluralism in society. Work as a vehicle of cultural and social expression. Content providers often fail to accomplish their mission. In that situation, we need to hold our steering through MIL. Activity - 1 Identify the differences across contents provided by various content providers. For example, which content providers provide informational content, which content providers provide entertainment content, and which source of content focuses on delivering misinformation, disinformation, and fake news? Additionally, identify these content providers as media and non-media content sources.
1.4 CONCEPTS OF MEDIA AND INFORMATION
LITERACY (MIL)
As a composite concept, media and information literacy (MIL) can be explained in various ways. However, it deals with the ability to engage with media and other forms of content. It comes with a broad vision to critically emphasise every form of content, including oral, text, audio, and audio-visual. However, with the increased internet penetration, digital media texts have been considered vulnerable content, which is regarded to get a critical evaluation.
1.4.1 Convergence
The concept of MIL was formed by UNESCO in 2007, blending two separate concepts, 'media literacy and 'information literacy. Afterwards, UNESCO has continuously worked to develop the concept with a holistic approach encompassing multiple dimensions of information and media. The power of empowerment provided by MIL has attracted global attention to local stakeholders and entered the academic sphere to empower the common people.

Understanding MIL IL and ML aim to empower people by making them information literate. Both terms focus on information production, distribution, and effect of the information in the form of media messages or other information. However, there are other arguments based on medium and access patterns. The Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (CILIP) in the UK defines information literacy: "Information literacy is the ability to think critically and make balanced judgments about any information we find and use. It empowers us as citizens to develop informed views and to engage fully with society (CILIP, 2018)." The National Association of Media Literacy (NAMLE) in the USA defines media literacy: "Media literacy is seen to consist of a series of communication competencies, including the ability to access, analyse, evaluate, and communicate information in a variety of forms, including print and non-print messages. Media literacy empowers people to be both critical thinkers and creative producers of an increasingly wide range of messages using images, language and sound (NAMLE, 2019)." The elements of media literacy and information literacy are the same. Media literacy (ML) includes the analysis of media ownership, production, distribution, consumption, and regulations related to media in its every form. At the same time, academic information sources are the receptacles of information literacy (IL). The experts of IL considered media as a sub-component of information, and IL includes multi-literacies. To justify the argument, all media can disseminate information, but not all information comes from the media. On the contrary, ML experts argue that information is a part of media, and the area of ML is broader than IL. The following table explains the two terminologies' convergent views on content, audience, and source. Table 1. The convergence of media and information literacy
Information Literacy CONVERGENCE Media/ Digital Literacy
Academic/research work CONTENTS Newspapers
FORMATS
Book Radio
Journals Television
Monographs Video
Patents Podcast
Business Social Networking Sites
Investigative research CONTENT Investigation
VALIDATION
Scientific process Industry validation Peer-reviewed Slow editing process Long editing process Sometimes, impromptu preparation, given the Editorial industry nature of media validation Citations are crucial User feedback/accepted assessment

Information Literacy CONVERGENCE Media/ Digital Literacy
Information Literacy
Groups - More PERCEIVED More general mass selective AUDIENCE audiences and often targeted groups Reading skills are Audio-visual messages, needed reading and viewing skills needed Less digested - More Sound bites or cognitive demand dramatic visuals User to search PERCEIVED Media follows/targets ACCESS user Retrieval-evaluation Skills to filter/reject and skills required analyse media messages ICT makers blurred Creation/production skills boundaries are also required
Educational use/ PERCEIVED MAIN Entertainment and
business PURPOSE FOR USE education focus Long term-decision Daily and short-term making decision-making Essentially printed PERCEIVED More audio-visuals text AESTHETICS Graphics Data chart Industry/government produced, large and small Usually academically companies - mainstream produced and alternative Librarians PERCEIVED SKILL Mass media specialists
PROMOTERS
Info-Collection use Media productions - truth concerns versus bias Educators Focus on aesthetics, design Concern for quality Digital production skills information *Adapted from Lau & Grizzle (2020) Media and information literacy have similarities and differences, but many overlapping areas exist. Together, the concepts work as composite concepts that include knowledge, skills, and abilities in different content dimensions, such as digital literacy, film literacy, advertisement literacy, news literacy, and library literacy.
1.4.2 Definition of MIL
Presently, citizens can access information from traditional or digital sources in various formats, such as print, audio, and video. However, what does a citizen do with the 17

Understanding MIL information? There are other stages to be accomplished after the information is accessed. The analysis and understanding come under the consumption of information. A set of skills is needed to evaluate a piece of information, and only a citizen can use the information for further process. MIL is the one-word solution for all those abilities. Media and information literacy (MIL) provides essential competencies to be engaged with information sources and messages. These competencies allow citizens to negotiate with the information structure and develop critical thinking. It gives an understanding of the role of media and information in society. The ability offers skills for socialising in the form of self-expression and creativity. The Moscow Declaration on Media and Information Literacy (2012) defined MIL as "A combination of knowledge, attitudes, skills, and practices required to access, analyse, evaluate, use, produce, and communicate information and knowledge in creative, legal, and ethical ways that respect human rights." A media and information literate person can access diverse media and information sources and know which information can be accessed from where and can be used to serve what purpose, who has created that information, and why. (S)he can analyse messages, values, and beliefs disseminated by media and other information producers. Moreover, (s)he should have the knowledge, skills, and attitude toward information and media. Thus, MIL expands beyond educational, professional, and societal boundaries. Media and information literate people should be able to: a. Understand the importance of media and other information providers in a democratic society. b. Know the role of information in daily life. c. Locate information. d. Evaluate information and contents received from providers. e. Use the information depending on moral principles and social values. f. Use specific digital skills to access, create and share information and media content. g. Participate in developmental and democratic activities with the understanding of free speech and expression.
1.4.3 Components of MIL
MIL's three major practical applications - explore, engage and empower- are called components of MIL. The Explore, Engage and Empower Model can describe the entire set of abilities regarding media and information literacy. It is also called the triple E of MIL. Following the process of exploring, engaging, and empowering, an individual can participate in society.
18 Fig. 1. The Explore, Engage and Empower Model of MIL

The description of the model is as follows: Understanding Media and
Information Literacy
Explore: The general information empowerment process starts with identifying required media content or information. When an individual needs any information, he searches for it from different sources. Thus, with the exploration of useful information, the process begins. In this stage (s), he tries to identify, access, and retrieve information and media content using various tools, techniques, or sources. Engage: The second stage in MIL is engagement. After accessing the information or media content, an individual needs to analyse it regarding social, economic, political, and cultural aspects. The credibility, authenticity, and reliability of the information or media content, as the fair representation of every section of society (e.g., gender, religion, ethnicity), must be critically evaluated. The purpose of the information, as well as the political, economic, and social interplay in it, are required to understand in this phase. Empower: In the empowerment stage, individuals can use the information or media content ethically and responsibly for personal, professional, and social causes. The production of content with the help of different media tools and sharing information or media content ensure the utilisation of the information. Activity - 2 Perform the following tasks: Stage 1: Search for content on "How to cure fever with home remedies?" from a random Google or YouTube search.Stage 2: If you get content on "How to cure fever with home remedies?" next, you must check the content's source of information and authenticity.Stage 3: Once done with the verification, you can share the content - "How to cure fever with home remedies?" on Facebook or Instagram.
1.4.4 MIL Competencies
MIL competencies can be defined (UNESCO, 2013) as "A set of competencies that empower citizens to access, retrieve, evaluate, understand, use and create information and media content in all formats and sources, using ICTs in a critical, ethical and effective way. The MIL competencies are composed of knowledge, skills, and attitudes. Although often synonymous with 'skills', in this document and for the MIL Assessment Framework, UNESCO uses the term, competencies, which is also more relevant when applied to a complex environment, including cognitive, metacognitive, and non-cognitive factors." The following describes MIL competencies regarding three tasks: explore, engage and empower: Explore - Apprehend the nature, role, and convenience of the media and informational content through various resources. Explore and locate media and informational content. Access desired media and informational content successfully and ethically. Retrieve and store media and informational content in various ways and tools.

Understanding MIL Engage - Discern the necessity of media and informational content providers in society. Analyse, evaluate, examine, articulate, and peruse the retrieved information and sources. Authenticate the gathered media and informational contents in pursuit of societal context. Organise and synthesise the gathered media and informational content. Empower - Produce innovative and ethical new informational content or knowledge creatively, keeping a strategic purpose. Communicate media content, knowledge, and other information ethically and effectively using appropriate methods and tools. Engage with media and other information providers to nurture self-expression, intercultural dialogue, and democratic participation in pursuit of the societal context in the appropriate manner. Monitor the impact of disseminated media content, knowledge, and other information. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How does media literacy relate to information literacy?

2. Explain the triple 'E' of MIL.

3. What are the normative roles of content providers?

1.5 MIL IN INDIA: STAKEHOLDERS AND BENEFITS
Stakeholders: The major actors involved in mechanising MIL goals are called stakeholders of MIL. Stakeholders in multiple layers play a role in making information empowerment fruitful. At the macro level, the policy framers and decision makers are the main regional, national, and international stakeholders as they implement decisions in information and media fields. At the meso level, institutional stakeholders such as 20 teacher training institutions and educational planners take the initiative to spread MIL

learning as a necessary course to learn. Finally, at the micro level, individual stakeholders Understanding Media and
Information Literacy
such as teachers and all citizens work to achieve the goal of MIL learning. Other than these, researchers, students, civil society, and community workers are also considered stakeholders. The active involvement of all the stakeholders is fundamental to the thriving of the MIL. Fig. 2. MIL stakeholders in India Importance of MIL for Indian citizens: According to UNESCO, MIL is the prerequisite for enjoying fundamental freedom and rights in personal, social, and professional spaces. As per the UNDP report (2021) on the Human Development Index (HDI), India ranked 132nd among 191 countries and territories. The spread of MIL must be required for the growth of India. It is necessary for good governance and political, economic, educational, and social development. India, being the largest democracy in the world, needs to ameliorate the environment of logical and critical thinking. The competencies of MIL would empower marginalised groups such as differently-abled people, indigenous populations, and marginalised genders. They would be able to participate in society. In India, the MIL is concerned (i) With fostering empowerment in India in terms of freedom of speech and expression, minority rights, gender equality, and fair representation of all classes; (ii) With providing suitable information and news for decision-making; (iii) In dealing with misinformation, disinformation and fake news, data privacy; (iv) In controlling the influence of media and ICT tools (e.g., social media, and gaming); (v) In fostering political and civic engagement. (vi) In promoting inter-cultural exchange; (vi) In bringing religious and regional peace.
1.6 DIMENSIONS OF MIL
MIL is a multidimensional concept that helps people to participate in society and contribute to global knowledge. The insertion of various information formats, as well as structures encompassing the ability to be indulged with media and information environment, is endeavoured by MIL. From the lens of communication studies, Media and digital literacy have been the most crucial branches of MIL. Media literacy empowers media consumers by inculcating media knowledge structures in them. It helps to combat the adverse effects of media by importing the usage of media tools and messages. Media literacy deals with news literacy and other media-specific abilities.

Understanding MIL Digital literacy empowers people with holistic expertise in digital tools. The present day's information can be dealt with and controlled by anybody using a range of MIL competencies. Fig. 3. Branches of MIL (compiled by author)
1.6.1 Media Literacy
Media literacy has been developed considering the negative effects of media messages on receivers' minds. Media literacy is the ability to access, analyse, evaluate, and communicate messages in various forms. Media literacy abilities have involved traditional mass media to the newest form of online media with a great deal of consideration. Understand the role and functions of media and Internet communications companies in democratic societies. The core components of media literacy are skills, knowledge structures, and personal locus. Skills are required to build knowledge structures. Knowledge structures are accumulated information, and personal locus is media literacy's mental or internal direction. Skills: Many scholars explained media literacy as thinking critically and analysing media messages in-depth. Potter (2016) emphasised seven specific skills- analysis, evaluation, grouping, induction, deduction, synthesis, and abstracting. Table 2. Seven skills of media literacy
Skill Definition
Analysis Breaking down content into meaningful elements Evaluation Judging the value of an element by comparing an element to some standard Grouping Determining which elements and how a group of elements are different from other groups of elements Induction Inferring a pattern within a small subset of elements and generalising it to all elements in a content

Deduction Using general principles to explain elements Information Literacy Synthesis Assembling elements into a new structure Abstracting Creating a brief, clear, and accurate description capturing the essence of a message in a smaller number of words than the message itself Knowledge structures: Knowledge structures are constructed of a set of organised information used to interpret media messages. The information is received through messages from different media- television, radio, newspaper, smartphone, computer, and books. It could deliver either factual or social information. Factual information (e.g., news) can be further verified, whereas social information (e.g., beliefs) cannot be verified further. Knowledge structures in various areas are required to seek out information and construct meaning. There are specific knowledge structures regarding media, such as media content, media industries, media effects, and media audiences. Personal locus: Goals and drives are fundamental elements in personal locus. The goal determines the preferences for the information. The sturdier the drive for the information, the more effort will be put into achieving the goal. The stronger the personal locus, the more conscious one can be toward media messages. The extended definition of media literacy comprises additional abilities: understanding the role of media and digital communication organisations, using media and digital communication organisations for self-expression and democratic participation and creating user-generated content using digital tools. Media literacy is the mother of other concepts related to media organisations. Therefore, it has to be driven to achieve others. News Literacy: News is not an actual demonstration of the facts. Instead, it is a produced version of factual information. We must watch the news media's function as the institution of valuable responsibilities is meant to make money. Hence, news must be critically evaluated. News literacy specifically covers the MIL competencies regarding news content. News literacy is the ability to critically analyse various forms of news content, the context of the news creation, and its consequences. Ashly (2020) defined, "We can think of news literacy as the set of attitudes, knowledge, and skills that a person brings to their consumption of information and their understanding of the structure of news media landscape." Advertisement Literacy: Advertising is a domain where a message is directed toward the audience in a much-targeted manner. The advertisement might represent distorted social realities, stereotypes, false claims, etc. Understanding the ideology, persuasion, and construction of advertisement messages has become crucial. This particular ability regarding advertising is called advertisement literacy. Advertisement literacy is the ability to interpret and evaluate advertisements' narratives critically. Cinema literacy: Cinema is an audio-visual form of media content; therefore, cinema literacy is a branch of MIL. The sceptical point of view towards cinemas, understanding of their language, apprehension about its persuasive intent, and perceiving the communication techniques used in cinemas can be called cinema literacy.
1.6.2 Digital Literacy
Digital literacy is the key to the digital information society. Since the 1970s, digital literacy has been developed through many phases and has lightened the route to

Understanding MIL understanding phenomena in 21st-century digital contexts. Digital literacy is a concept that defines a generic understanding of digital usage. It allows a person to learn the practical usage of information and communication tools such as the Internet, social media, and mobile. It refers to the motivation, knowledge, and skills required to empower a person digitally. Digital literacy revolves around the following: Identification, retrieval, and storage of information via digital tools. Sharing information through digital tools. Creation of content using digital tools. Understanding of digital identity Knowledge of digital safety and security, such as online safety measures, data protection, cyber laws, cyber security, and cyber crimes Recognise digital rights Cultural and social sensitivity in digital information processing encoding and decoding. Digital skills are the interface between the physical world and the virtual world. A person must achieve all the skills to be an active virtual world citizen. Van Dijk and Van Deursen (2014) listed various digital skills: operational skills, traditional skills, information skills, communication skills, and content-creation skills. Table 3. Ranges of digital skills
Skills Instances
Medium-related Operational skills Operate internet service functions skills Using search engines Manage different file formats Formal skills Usage of the Internet by using hyperlinks Maintaining a sense of location while navigating the Internet Content-related Information skills Locate required information skills Decode message online Encode message online Content creation Creation of quality content skills Strategic skills Usage of digital tools to reach a particular goal Computer literacy: Computer literacy has been defined as the ability to use computer tools and resources such as computer hardware and software technologies. Computer literacy can include the fundamental use of a computer, such as MS Word and Excel, to an advanced stage of programming languages, such as Java and C++, and even shortcut keys from the keyboard. According to the latest definition of media and information literacy, it is composed of contemporary media and information sources. It hardly talks about computer literacy. Instead, computer literacy can be included under digital literacy, a MIL branch.

Internet literacy: Internet literacy, a sub-part of MIL, does not deal with the entire Understanding Media and
Information Literacy
media and information set-up but with media and information processed through the Internet. Internet literacy refers to the ability to use the Internet with efficacy. Internet literacy can be assessed by evaluating operational internet skills, formal internet skills, information skills, communication skills, content, creation skills and strategic skills. Internet literacy is the ability to access, understand, and create informational content online (Livingston, 2009; Van Deursen & Van Dijk, 2009) while embracing the following points: the ability to deal with illegal and harmful content on the Internet, the ability to protect self-privacy and identity using security measures. Social media literacy: Social media literacy can be defined as the ability to access various forms of content disseminated through social media platforms, evaluate the content, and produce content for social media platforms. Parallelly, using social media safely and securely has played a crucial role since the advent of complex social media environments. Social media literacy includes social media such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. Social media literacy covers many MIL competencies that critically evaluate information and media from digital sources. AI literacy: Artificial intelligence is one of the latest branches of MIL. AI is one of the latest interventions in the human-technological interface. AI is important in information gathering, processing, and spreading from producers and receivers. Artificial intelligence literacy is knowledge of the functions of AI, the ability to analyse the usage of AI, machine learning, and algorithms, and the practical implications of AI in human lives. Safety and security literacy: It is important to know that any cyberspace activity might bring a threat. Knowledge about online risks and threats and an understanding affirmative behaviour are required in the modern world. Therefore, specific literacy is necessary to prevent risky behaviours and acquire skills to deal with critical situations (Kopecky & Szatkowski, 2017). The complexity of the media and information environment has given rise to the notion of safety. Hence, safety literacy is a crucial sub-part of MIL. Safety literacy is the knowledge and skills of safety measures needed in dealing with mass media, digital media, and other information sources and contents. Recently, it has dealt with digital security, such as digital banking security, social media security, and other types of digital security. Activity - 3 Social media can foster public participation. Discuss how social media exercise this function. Give an argument on the positive and negative sides of social media usage. Also, discuss threats and risks you have encountered while using social media.
1.7 UNDERSTANDING THE SOURCE AND THE
RECEIVER
1.7.1 Sourcing Information
The information available across multiple sources varies based on accuracy, reliability, and values. Formats of content also vary depending on the technological characteristics of the source. For example, electronic sources (e.g., radio, television) contain text, images, and audio-visual, whereas non-electronic sources (e.g., books, newspapers,

Understanding MIL and magazines) offer only text and images. Nevertheless, due to the convergence of technology, all formats come together on online sources. Online repositories (e.g., online databases, libraries) and online media have made available information at our doorsteps. However, there are some illicit sources that we need to verify before we process the information. Hence, an important task is to critically evaluate the sources' accuracy. We can easily identify useful sources when the information usage objective remains translucent. We can access content sources such as government archives, libraries, media (television, radio, print media), online media, social media, etc. These content providers play important roles in - Informing Entertaining Educating Preserving cultural heritage Collecting civic history Promoting human rights We need to determine the type of content that can gratify our needs. Based on the need, we can identify specific sources. For example, if we want to read a novel, we must visit a library. Likewise, we can read local newspapers if we need to read the local news. Content providers often deny their duties and become inclined towards propaganda, financial benefits, cultural hegemony, etc. However, all the information providers are equally important, and all the providers help in promoting sustainable development.
1.7.2 Audience
We are accommodated with information access, and we receive much information daily. As an information audience, we engage ourselves in processing that information. When we encounter a piece of information, we filter it out (ignore) or in (process). Once we filter in a piece of information, we identify the meaning of the information to add to our knowledge structures. Our skills and competencies in evaluating information work cumulatively in information processing. The specifications of skills and competencies differ depending on the audience. There are two types of audiences: mass audience and niche audience. The information made for the mass audience communicates to all similarly (e.g., newspapers, books). However, it is assumed that people process information within an intra-personal context. Therefore, another term regarding the target audience comes into existence besides the mass audience: niche audience. Mass media and other information providers produce information for special audiences (niche audiences) who share some common interests. The niche audiences can be distinguished based on geographical segmentation, demographic segmentation, social class segmentation, psychographic segmentation, etc. The message or information often targets a niche audience, e.g., travel magazines, political magazines, advertisements of beauty products, and games. People use media and information sources to gratify their own needs. Following this concept, some special audiences, such as children, youth, and women, serve as niche audience groups. Children and youth are targeted by messages they should encounter, e.g., advertisements for instant foods. Specifically, they are directed to be influenced

by political or capitalist ideology in the online sphere. They often encounter biased Understanding Media and
Information Literacy
representations of facts. Women get victimised while using social media. Online media have broadened the path of audience participation. With the hand of online media, the traditional notion of the consumer has become stagnant, and the new concept called prosumer (active users) has lightened its way. Although many rules, laws, and safety measures must be followed while participating in online spaces, it has become a place of exposure to emotional, financial, and social attacks. When effectively using information sources or platforms, many audiences use media and other information sources for entertainment rather than upholding tangible outcomes. Nevertheless, opportunity and challenges have to reside in every sphere of information flow, whether it is entertainment or educational exercise. Overall, audiences are confronted with content and must recognise its inhabited cleft. The thrive to misinformation and disinformation such as satire or parody, misleading content, imposter content, fabricated content, manipulated content, and fake news are major threats to news audiences. MIL helps mass audiences and niche audiences such as children and women to discern the value of information sources and contents and cultivate the effective usage of online media. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the seven skills of media literacy?

2. Define digital literacy.

3. What is a niche audience?

1.8 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instractions for the course counsellers) Several pedagogical approaches can be applied in inculcating MIL among learners. Identify any of the pedagogical approaches of your choice and apply them to the following activities. a) Consider the components of MIL presented in Fig. 1. and discuss each. Parallelly, describe the importance of each of the components. b) Consider the following terminologies and define the similarities and differences between 'Media and Information Literacy. You can search the Internet or the 27

Understanding MIL library for various definitions of the following terminologies. Finally, briefly explain your point of view on combining media literacy with information literacy to form MIL. Media literacy Internet literacy News literacy Computer literacy Digital literacy Cinema literacy Social media literacy Safety literacy AI literacy Security literacy
1.9 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, you have learned about the most crucial skills needed to achieve the goal of sustainable development. There has been discussion on media and information literacy as composite factors, including information literacy, media literacy, and digital literacy. MIL talks about information providers, information processing, and information receivers. The roles of content providers or sources were explained in this unit. The duties and responsibilities of content providers have been explained concerning the audience's expectations. There are some stages in the process of MIL acquisition. These were narrated as the components of MIL. Along with this, the competencies of MIL were also put together. MIL should be considered a set of competencies and assimilation of knowledge about other inclined literacies explained in this unit. The potential branches of MIL were discussed with definitions such as advertisement literacy, cinema literacy, news literacy, internet literacy, social media literacy, and security literacy. The importance of these literacies at present was described to make you understand the phenomena. You have gained an overall understanding of making the audience empowered. Hence, the type of audience and the specifications of making an audience pool have also been discussed. This unit will give you a clear idea about MIL and its branches, processes, and stakeholders. With this unit, you will be prepared to follow up with the deepest understanding of MIL. The MIL competencies concerning media content across print, electronic, and digital media have been discussed. In this unit, MIL presented as a nexus of human rights in developing the personal ability to be an empowered citizen.
1.10 KEYWORDS
MIL competencies : The abilities required to become an active audience of media and other content. Media literacy : It is a person's ability to access, analyse and use media messages. Digital literacy : UNESCO (2013) defined digital literacy as "The ability to use digital technology, communication tools or networks to locate, evaluate, use and create information. It also refers to the ability to understand and use information in multiple formats from various sources when presented via computers, or to a person's ability to perform tasks effectively in a digital environment."

Critical thinking : Critical thinking is the ability to analyse and examine Understanding Media and
Information Literacy
information and ideas to find the connotative meaning rather than the denotative meaning. Prosumers : Alvin Toffler introduced the term 'prosumer' in his 1980 book, 'The Third Wave'. It refers to the combination of production and consumption. With the development of information communication technologies, media consumers can create content. Hence, not only do they consume, but they also produce content. Artificial intelligence : Artificial intelligence manifests by machines to exhibit human (AI) cognitive functions such as learning and problem-solving. In this machine learning process, a class of algorithms has functioned to automate analytical model building.
1.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Hobbs, R. (2011). Digital and media literacy: Connecting culture and
classroom. Corwin Press.
2. Hobbs, R. (2016). Exploring the roots of digital and media literacy through
personal narrative. Temple University Press.
3. Mackey, M. (2007). Literacies across media: Playing the text (2nd ed.).
Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
4. Neuman, W. R. (2010). Media, technology, and society: Theories of media
evolution. University of Michigan Press.
5. Potter, W. J. (2018). Media literacy. Sage Publications.
6. Silverblstt. A., & Yadav. A., & Kundu. V. (2022). Media Literacy: Keys to
Interpreting Media Messages. Kanishka Publishers. Online Resources:
1. https://webarchive.unesco.org/20181207154048/http://www.unesco.org/new/en/
communication-and-information/media-development/media-literacy/five-laws-of-mil/
2. Grizzle, A., Wilson, C., Tuazon, R., Cheung, C. K., Lau, J., Fischer, R., ... & Gulston,
C. (2021). Media and information literate citizens: think critically, click wisely!
1.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The elements of media literacy and information literacy are the same. Media
and information literacy have similarities and differences, but many overlapping areas exist. Together, the concepts work as composite concepts that include knowledge, skills, and abilities in different content dimensions, such as digital literacy, film literacy, advertisement literacy, news literacy, and library literacy.

Understanding MIL 2. The description of the triple E of the MIL model is as follows: Explore: The general information empowerment process starts with identifying required media content or information. When an individual needs information, he searches for it from different sources. Thus, with the exploration of useful information, the process begins. In this stage (s), he tries to identify, access, and retrieve information and media content using various tools, techniques, or sources. Engage: The second stage in MIL is engagement. After accessing the information or media content, an individual needs to analyse it concerning social, economic, political, and cultural aspects. The credibility, authenticity, and reliability of the information or media content, as the fair representation of every section of society (e.g., gender, religion, ethnicity), must be critically evaluated. The purpose of the information, as well as the political, economic, and social interplay in it, are required to understand in this phase. Empower: In the empowerment stage, individuals can use the information or media content ethically and responsibly for personal, professional, and social causes. The production of content with the help of different media tools and sharing information or media content ensure the utilisation of the information.
3. The normative roles of media and non-media, both content providers, fall
under the critical evaluation. The content providers are expected to: Provide information about issues of local, national, and international importance. Provide valuable information in facilitating the democratic development of a country. Help evaluate public debates and make informed decisions. Act as a bridge between government and citizens. Help understand society and contemporary issues, thus building a sense of belonging. Keep a check on governmental works, corruption, and corporate malpractice, thus creating transparency in public life. Function in promoting the right to freedom of expression and pluralism in society. Work as a vehicle of cultural and social expression. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Potter (2016) emphasised seven specific skills- analysis, evaluation, grouping,
induction, deduction, synthesis, and abstracting. Analysis: Breaking down content into meaningful elements Evaluation: Judging the value of an element by comparing an element to some standard Grouping: Determining which elements and how a group of elements are different from other groups of elements

Induction: Inferring a pattern within a small subset of elements and generalising Understanding Media and
Information Literacy
it to all elements in a content Deduction: Using general principles to explain elements Synthesis: Assembling elements into a new structure Abstracting: Creating a brief, clear, and accurate description capturing the essence of a message in a smaller number of words than the message itself
2. Digital literacy is a concept that defines a generic understanding of digital
usage. It allows a person to learn the effective usage of information and communication tools such as the Internet, social media, and mobile. It refers to the motivation, knowledge, and skills required to empower a person digitally. Digital literacy revolves around the following: Identification, retrieval, and storage of information via digital tools. Sharing information through digital tools. Creation of content using digital tools. Understanding of digital identity Knowledge of digital safety and security such as online safety measures, data protection, cyber laws, cyber security, cyber crimes Recognise digital rights Cultural and social sensitivity in digital information processing encoding and decoding.
3. Mass media and other information providers produce information for special
audiences (niche audiences) who share some common interests. The niche audiences can be distinguished based on geographical segmentation, demographic segmentation, social class segmentation, psychographic segmentation, etc. The message or information often targets a niche audience, e.g., travel magazines, political magazines, advertisements of beauty products, and games.

UNIT 2 MIL, CIVIC PARTICIPATION AND
RIGHT TO INFORMATION
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 Civic Participation and MIL
2.2.1 The Concept of Civic Participation
2.2.2 MIL, Civic Participation and Citizenship in India
2.2.3 Strategies in Civic Participation
2.2.4 Civic Participation and Environments (Community and Classroom)
2.3 Civic Media Literacy
2.3.1 Elements of Civic Media Literacies
2.3.2 Civic Media Literacy in the Digital Era
2.4 Right to Information
2.5 Citizens, Media and Democracy
2.5.1 Normative Role of Journalism
2.5.2 Freedom of the Press and Editorial Independence
2.5.3 Media Pluralism
2.6 Pedagogical Approaches
2.7 Let Us Sum Up
2.8 Keywords
2.9 Further Readings
2.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
2.0 INTRODUCTION
Media and information literacy (MIL) aims to make a good consumer of media messages and, second, a good citizen. In this unit, we will learn about the second aim of MIL, as we know that media and information literacy (MIL) are the solutions to the occurrence of harmful rhetoric that turns out to be in mainstream media and digital media. Parallelly, MIL is meant to form civic intentionality that is more than skill attainment approaches to develop critical consciousness. Civic intentionality in achieving the goal of civic participation secures the ability to produce an effect and create a difference in society. The great philosopher Aristotle said, "It is not always the same thing to be a good man and a good citizen". Civic participation performs individual and collective action in the community, thus inhabiting new languages of engagement in our society. Therefore, the accomplishments can understand not only the micro-levels and macro-levels of media culture but also the translation of the knowledge into action to perform better in a civic way. Hence, civic participation materialises with media and information literacy, specifically civic media literacy. In this sense, civic media literacy is a value-driven approach of MIL that is inherently a process toward inter-relational well-being. The abundant and pervasive digital ecosystems make civic participation more fluid and

drive the MIL into the civic culture. Wherein the strategies of civic participation and the MIL, Civic Participation and
Right to Information
outcome based on learning in media practices produce democratic values implicitly in the minds of citizens. Access to information has become a fundamental point of discussion since adopting the Rio Declaration in 1992. Later, it was acknowledged in the sustainable development goals as an enabling mechanism for transparent and participatory governance. This Unit will discuss the democratic values of media and participation. According to Sustainable Development Goals, access to information is crucial for civic empowerment. It leads us to participate in the decision-making process, influence the implementation of public law, evaluate government and facilitate effective public participation. Media voices for the citizens, but the commercialisation of the media pillars the dissemination of misinformation, disinformation, fake news, and propaganda. Hence, the normative role of media functions in making democracy viable.
2.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this Unit, you will be able to: understand the concept of civic participation for the progression of democracy; understand the importance of media and information literacy for civic participation; construct the meaning of civic media literacy; describe the importance of media in making sustainable democracy; they understand and evaluate the right to information and information freedom; and understand and describe the normative role of journalism, media pluralism and press freedom.
2.2 CIVIC PARTICIPATION AND MIL
Media and information literacy lead to civic empowerment through civic participation. The notion of civic participation allows every citizen to actively engage with the institutions of civil society and the public sphere, hence catering for involvement in political activity featuring democratic participation. The four dimensions of preconditions to civic participation are mutually reinforcing factors:
1) Relevant knowledge and competencies: People must have relevant
information. The source of knowledge should be objective and comprehensive. They must have the attitude and ability to express their ideas and beliefs if they want to participate in the public sphere.
2) Loyalty to democratic values and procedures: Willingness to follow
democratic principles supports the legal, political, and whole democratic governance system. Democracy will not run if the value and loyalty of the participants fail.
3) Identities as citizens: To participate, one must consider oneself a citizen.
The formal perspective of citizenship conceptually indicates the political life in

Understanding MIL a democracy. The social perspective of citizenship considers citizenship concerning particular sets of practices in terms of social agency subjectively encompassing the attributes this social category may involve.
4) Respect for fundamental civil and political rights: There must be an
appreciation of civil rights and the rights of minority groups, including the idea that fundamental rights can be exercised freely.
2.2.1 The Concept of Civic Participation
Civic participation is a widely used term that covers a range of definitions. The definition depends on the viewer's perspective to make the term contextualised. In making it more inclusive, it can be viewed through the lens of community service, collective action, political involvement or social change. In defining civic participation from the point of view of community involvement, emphasise participation in community service as a citizen. Collective action can be defined as individual participation through collective action toward making a better society. The political definition of civic participation is activities that have a political influence, change, or understanding. Civic engagement in the dimension of social change describes an active citizen's role in shaping a community's future. Fig 1: Forms of civic participation Civic participation effectively promotes democratic governance, which is crucial for democracy in every form. Civic participation is termed as participatory behaviour of citizens that revolves around civic sense, a concept mostly related to citizenship and a sense of belonging to the community in different layers such as the local community, state community and national community. Active citizenship could be initiated and maintained using tools and resources provided directly by the media or government, sometimes by libraries and other information providers. The ability or literacy to use those resources is necessary to achieve participation.
2.2.2 MIL, Civic Participation and Citizenship in India
The Latin word 'civic' is rooted in two words: city and citizen. When joined with participation, the word civic is a vast action encompassing the term comes to the front. However, the concept of citizenship is reflected in the sense of belonging to the Indian community. Three dimensions of citizenship first, right-based (legal definition), the relationship between citizen and StateState (philosophical definition), and the relationship with the society (socio-political definition), create the understanding of civic in the sense of citizenship and State. A citizen equipped with a good knowledge of the State and civic affairs can participate in the political arena and the democratic process of the country. From a top-down point of view, the right to participate in the administrative arena is a central element of stable governance.

Right to Information
Fig. 2: Dimensions of Citizenship The important requirements for civic participation for Indian citizens are knowledge of civic affairs and the skill to extract knowledge from the huge information pool. This allows a citizen to participate better in every sphere of the civic arena of the community and the nation. The ability can be called civic competence, which is needed to foster justice, civil rights, and democracy. Media, including print, broadcast and online, provide economic, political and social development information. As all citizens are a part of a separate media audience, they must understand the paradox of information and media. Media and information literacy (MIL) offers the necessary competencies for citizens to make them critical thinkers of the media messages and build sincere participation. Civic participation in marginalised groups can bring a change. Specifically, women may proceed to ensure support from the government and laws of protection. It may make more aware of the rights of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This enhances opportunities for developing quality in society across all classes and sections. The Internet provides various outlets, including the voices of minorities and other marginalised groups. MIL aids with voices in converting capabilities into valued functioning that encompasses literacy in Civic renewal, participation through digital media and participation through non-digital media
2.2.3 Strategies in Civic Participation
Civic participation is of different forms, and there are several indicators. The terms to describe are diverse, too. According to Keeter, Zukin, Andolina, and Jenkins (2002), the indicators of engagement can be of various kinds: civic indicators (e.g., community problem solving), electoral indicators (e.g., campaign contributions), and indicators of political voice (e.g., contacting media). Barrett and Brunton-Smith (2014) have given forms of engagement and participation. Civic participation consists of participation in community wellbeing, working for non-political organisations, voluntary work, consumer activism, etc. They have specified psychological engagement with media exposure and describe holding civic values, beliefs and skills. Engagement is the knowledge and attitude toward civic affairs and information is the pillar. Through civic participation, citizens seek to confirm whether their voice is heard. Participation works as the building block of faith and trust in democracy. It promotes participation in politics and governmental work and influences government policy.

Understanding MIL Renee Hobbs (2010) proposed five essential competencies of media literacy for digital media that encourage active participation through the consumption and creation of messages. Applying Hobbs's elements to the civic arena, five attributes cater to the participants' interests. These attributes are as follows: Fig. 3. Interconnection between attributes of MIL and civic participation (i) Access: Access to the information (ii) Analyse and evaluate: Analyse the information to distinguish it from the invaluable knowledge. Evaluation of the valuable information to make usable knowledge (iii) Create: Creation of civic attitude toward the community or StateState (iv) Reflect: Application of social responsibility to self-identity and communication behaviour (v) Act: Acting in the phase of civic participation Civic participation and empowerment serve as the vehicles through which citizens with political differences can voice non-violently in democracy. The role of media and information literate citizens in information flow must be evaluated. A media and information literate citizen firstly (i) understands the value of information in a democratic society; (ii) knows the role of information providers in democracy; (iii) recognises the source of information; secondly, (iv) the ability to evaluate information gained from any source; (v) should understand when and where to share the information; third, (vi) ability to utilise the digital skill into outcome; (vii) ability to build communication with the information providers; (viii) ability to sustain a culture in the developmental process hence enhancing the intercultural dialogue in information production.
2.2.4 Civic Participation and Environments (Community and
Classroom) The learning environment changes voice, agency and participation into considerable experiences. Media literacy practices in the classroom and community make citizens inclined to be engaged and operative in participation. Thus, citizenship education is crucial in making civic participation more flexible. In an educational sense, educational practice helps build individual civic competencies, knowledge, and beliefs through civic development. The concepts of civic development expand from the school learning stage. Socio-political development theory explains that civic development of students occurs in five steps: gaining knowledge (cognitive stage- social and emotional development) where social problems are introduced; logical skills where social problems are recognised; emotional abilities (ability to contribute to social change) in the youth phase, political capabilities where youth learn to touch the problems civically, and social competencies where youth establish a relationship with the civil

society. Citizens can participate in the decision-making process when they accrue the MIL, Civic Participation and
Right to Information
critical skills to evaluate a problem civically and thus can contribute to the dynamic World. At the community level, the strategic approach could be promoted to establish citizenship education, promote public awareness, and trigger participation for all ages in the community environment. Citizenship education deals with critical skills for civic literacy, diversity and intercultural understanding, environmental sustainability, democratic values, and human rights. Citizenship education must be inclusive of marginalised groups such as minorities, migrants, etc. The stakeholders of change, such as the media, government, educational institutions, community centres, and libraries, must be responsible for promoting citizenship education at the community level. For example, during the covid 19, the demand for accurate, reliable and timely information was marked. Where civic participation was stronger, the transparency and openness of the authorities had made the supply easier. Digital civic participation has helped counterbalance the threat of expanding disinformation and misinformation in response to the crisis.
2.3 CIVIC MEDIA LITERACY (CML)
Civic media literacy is a pedagogical concept that develops skills and competencies in people to act and contribute significantly to the common good. In the era of information inundation, we need skills compatible with media and information that serve the civic outcomes of our communities. According to Paul Mihailidis (2018), "Civic media literacies are the set of values, practices, and processes that prepare people to use media in support of solving social problems, reinventing spaces for meaningful engagement, creating positive dialogue in communities, opening up avenues for impactful action taking and working, at realistic scale, to facilitate "technologies, designs, and practices that produce and reproduce the sense of being in the world with others toward the common good".
2.3.1 Elements of Civic Media Literacies
'Being vocal' is the initial stage of civic media literacy practice, and its value becomes agentive while guided by CML. We can realise our ability to contribute with the help of CML. Finally, it leads to participation. Participation in the context of citizenship is about deploying and employing resources to facilitate a meaningful outcome. It always subsumes us under the agency of change. In designing media literacy practices articulated with civic intentionality, we must consider the critical media ability that can suitably achieve engagement with personal, social and civic issues. Thus, action could be taken to create constructive pathways in the stages of media literacy. According to Paul Mihailidis (2018), civic media literacy is the civic intentionality of media literacy, where civic intentionality means "Being in the world with others." He has noted five elements in achieving civic media literacy: caring, critical consciousness, imagination, persistence, and emancipation. Caring: Media opens up exposure to various views. Deconstruction of media text helps us care about certain political, social or civic issues. Thus, CML establishes closeness in our community.

Understanding MIL Critical consciousness: The views we gain must be embedded with critical reflection, dialogue and standpoint. The transformed knowledge gained from critical inquiry makes the notion of our relation to the world. Imagination: The creative reflection of expressing the political or civic rhetoric could be an effective way of participation. CML talks about civic imagery that can hold out expression by employing creative interventions.
Fig.4. Civic Media Literacies
Persistence: Persistent mindset embraces engagement with civic, political or social issues and entails a transaction from knowledge to action, making a consciousness toward society. Emancipation: Emancipatory means the communication practice leading towards empowerment and social betterment that challenges the dominant power in media and ICT. Using technology, we can enjoy freedom through activism. CML interrogates media monopoly, navigates through alternative spaces (e.g., online), and gives power to the marginalised section. The Salzburg Academy in Salzburg, Austria, developed a curriculum for secondary and college-level educators to explore media's role in civil society and global citizenship, connecting media literacy skills to civic voice. The curriculum was based on the notion that to get civic responsibility, one must acquire the ability and understanding to evaluate the role of media in society and the possible influence of media on local and global culture. The curriculum had two parts: (i) critical thinking and critical skills and (ii) freedom of expression. Where critical thinking and critical skills develop the learning outcome in identifying news matters, monitoring media coverage, and understanding the media's role in shaping global issues. Freedom of expression helps to ameliorate attitudes regarding the defence of freedom of expression/freedom of the press, promotion of media literacy by being responsible communicators, and motivation to the media to cover news better. Activity - 1 Discuss why the citizens should participate in the civic areas of the country. What civic areas of your country do citizens need to focus more on?

2.3.2 Civic Media Literacy in the Digital Era MIL, Civic Participation and
Right to Information
The digital world with mobiles, the Internet, and big data further disrupts or facilitates civic outcomes of information communication technologies. Civic media literacy establishes a core argument to banish the disruption of information outrage and parallelly invites the usage of information to welcome the general to specific well-being. Emerging information and communication norms perpetuate nuance and meaningful dialogue. Subsequently, the connective platforms of algorithms and data have restructured the scenario of people, information and media. The access, consumption and sharing of information with the communities have become spontaneous. Along with the famous media conglomerates, the content production and engagement landscape has entered the hands of new organisations, namely Google, Microsoft, and Meta. The new legacy organisations contribute to facilitating information and communication across the globe. As a result, new connective platforms have become a pool to share information, calling the engaged people to advocate local problems and social causes. The social media movements offer a nuanced picture of civic participation using digital media to contribute to community issues. Following the recent trend, civic media literacy has become an endeavour to consolidate the audiences about the State of complexity that inhabits information platforms. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Explain the term 'civic participation.

2) What are the elements of 'civic media literacy'?

3) How does civic participation help marginalise sections?

2.4 RIGHT TO INFORMATION
The word freedom connotes 'liberty', 'right', and 'power', but from the jurisprudential point of view, the word 'right' is more appropriate. Right to information enables citizens to know their duties towards the nation. Preconditions for the right to information could be political stability, independence of the judiciary, availability of adequate infrastructural facilities, regulatory mechanisms, information-friendly infrastructure, etc. Proper library systems, media channels, and newspapers are potential sources for disseminating information and knowledge. Public service media needs to be employed to provide public information. Thus, media, being content providers, help ensure citizens' right to freedom of information. 39

Understanding MIL One of the aims of civic participation must be the organisation and articulation of citizens' relationship with the State. Citizens' rights, such as freedom of speech and expression, information rights, etc., proved essential in developing public communication. English philosopher Herbert Spencer propagated the view of the role of freedom of men in enhancing the capability of a person. Followed by Spencer, John Locke stressed the importance of freedom as a purpose of the law. The emergence of a right to information manifests the State's call for civic engagement. To prevent the abuse of power by the authorities and to make them accountable to the citizens, the RTI Act 2005 was passed and taken into force on December 22, 2005. This act allows citizens to request public domain documents, records, etc. However, the right is limited in national security, personal privacy and commercial confidentiality cases. With the individual right to information liberalisation, special bodies to pay attention to access to information have become fundamental, providing a way to direct civic engagement. Fig.5: Right to information (Source: rti.gov.in) Particularly in India, the freedom of information is drastically curtailed due to the inherent governance system. Many times, misinformation prevailed over the information. Hence, access to information is the backbone of a democratic country, facilitating social comptrollership and encouraging citizen participation to conduct good governance. According to Gilreath & Jefferson (1999), informed citizenry forms the foundation of good governance. Democracy gets stronger when citizens have the right to access information held by public or private bodies indulged in public interest business. Additionally, access to information is needed in decision-making, evaluating public officials, evaluating the governments and facilitating effective public participation. It oversights the stakeholders responsible for the vital work in making democracy well and balances the power of the State. To strengthen citizen engagement, the access and right to information provide the independence and resources that facilitate public management. Access to information in education, health, institutional transparency, agriculture, public utility service, employment and labour rights, peace and inclusiveness cater to the civic utility aspects of the right to information. It looks into preventing corruption with citizens' access to facts and data from governments. With communication tools, the government provides valuable data about new policy framing, budget allowances, etc., that empowers citizens. If a government fails to do so, the citizens can speak out against this injustice. But, the assurance from the law often needs to meet standards and be used appropriately. The intricate bureaucracy may put important information out of reach for citizens, who often need to be made aware of the RTI law of India. That is why the deliberate assistance of independent media is essential to make the citizens' participation and democracy sail. Access to media has been an obstacle for many of the rural population in India. The causes of the ineffectiveness are either illiteracy, which may render the print media useless, or other reasons, such as financial constraints and language barriers.

2.5 CITIZENS, MEDIA AND DEMOCRACY
Right to Information
As citizens of a developing country, we often struggle to establish engagement, find access to civic institutions, and embrace civic participation. Media and information literacy that propels learning about freedom of expression and citizenship can mitigate reluctance and ease the struggle. There is a thread of connection between media, the right to information, freedom of expression and civic participation, and that is democratic values. Thus, media reforms add to the civic reforms of the country. Media allows citizens to become informed voters who are responsible and active participants in local, national, and global communities. Here, we will try to develop an understanding of the contribution of media to civic empowerment and democracy.
2.5.1 Normative Roles of Journalism
Without journalism, there will be a significant problem in making access to information a public domain. Journalism helps us get the information we need about our communities, cities, countries and the world. Some factors regarding journalistic practice make it more valuable to citizens. The factors are as follows: Accuracy and fairness: The key objective of journalism is collecting and disseminating the truth. The positive role of journalism in combating misinformation, disinformation and propaganda makes citizens aware, positive and empowered. Organising knowledge: Journalism creates organised knowledge that stipulates an idea about public service bodies' agenda, policy and implication. Public interest: Journalism started as a public service that voices the public for the public. Press aims to provide information about public issues related to social, cultural, political, health, etc. Accountability: Journalism should monitor the service of the bodies in power and position, including public and private organisations and the government. Besides, the media should also be accountable to the citizens. Independence: Media should be opinion-free. Unbiased, as well as credible journalism, is an essential component of democracy. Voice of citizens: The media should not be a platform for one-way communication. There should be an opportunity to give feedback to the media. Like 'letters to the editor, the engagement to be an active audience should come up with a new focus on non-digital and digital media. Focus on news elements: Citizens need newsworthy information. Hence, the media should disseminate timely knowledge that is valuable for active citizenship. Balancing privacy and the right to know: The media provides the right to know and access information. But citizens expect a balance between the right to information and privacy. There should be a clear distinction between these two converging areas. Activity - 2 Assess the role of alternative or independent media in your community. Select one example and describe the key elements that make it independent. In what ways does it allow people to participate in the democratic process? In what ways is it different from mainstream media?

Understanding MIL 2.5.2 Freedom of the Press and Editorial Independence Framers of the Indian constitution viewed the freedom of the press as a vivid landscape of people's rights in a democracy. Freedom of speech and expression is a right protected by the Indian constitution. Citizens can express themselves in a democratic country, and the press follows the same. Commenting on the suggestion of a separate section for freedom of the press, Dr B. R. Ambedkar said, "The press has no special rights which are not to be given or which are not to be exercised by the citizen in his capacity. The editor of the press or the manager are all citizens; therefore, when they choose to write newspapers, they are merely exercising their right to expression. In my judgement, no special mention of the freedom of the press is necessary." The Development of information systems can only happen if journalists can freely utilise the information they obtain. Journalists in India frequently get punished for sharing specific information; in some cases, they get obstructed through repressive laws. There is no separate law for the freedom of the press in India. The legal right of freedom of speech and expression, Article 19 (1) (a) in the Indian constitution guarantees the freedom of speech and expression for all citizens of the country, including press freedom, considering the press as the representative of citizens of India. Those involved in disseminating information and opinions, such as print, electronic, and digital media, enjoy reasonable freedom. But, the press has to follow the reasonable restrictions explained under Article 19 (2) of the Indian constitution. Although freedom is there, it fails due to the power struggle between editors and owners. Media nowadays is called an elitist bourgeois construct that considers the values and interests of the bourgeois. The meaning of freedom of the press is not accurate whether it serves the journalists, editors or the owners of the media outlets. The experience of the journalists describes that press freedom reserves the freedom of speech and expression of the owner of the concerned media house. The editor and working journalists hardly enjoy freedom within their media houses. The reportage of serious developmental issues is steadily declining with the blurring of lines between information and propaganda. Hence, a pessimistic view of the media is often remarked on regarding the quality of media reports. Media with biased opinions due to commercialisation and commoditisation hampers the real aim of journalism. The highest authority of the house sets the editorial policy of the media. The editors follow the opinion piece and content selection guidelines instructed by the authority. In some cases, the funding agency influences the content production in a media. The media houses influenced by political parties or their ideology hamper the objective of freedom of expression and misrepresent information. After the FDI (Foreign Direct Investment) got started, the surge of private channels victimised the flow of information. The editorial freedom depends on the type of media. Trends in media types revolve around three traditions: independent, state-controlled, and organisational media. State- controlled media speaks for the State, whereas the organisational media voices the organisational benefits. In the case of independent media, it is free to set its editorial policy. Independent media houses often hand the ideology to business organisations to earn revenue. Frequently, it fails to pin the editorial criticism against the government. But there is always an opposite side of a coin. In community media (such as community radio stations), the content has been covered by developmental causes. The spread of internet connectivity has changed the notion of media monopoly and freedom of content. It has led to media expression for local, specific and targeted coverage.

2.5.3 Media Pluralism MIL, Civic Participation and
Right to Information
The pillars of democracy- the legislature, the judiciary, and the executive- have been supposed to be checked by the media, which is the fourth pillar of democracy. The media compliments the democratic society by forming various opinions. As a representative of the citizens, the media is supposed to voice the people from every class, religion, and area of India. Media should be pluralistic, covering the voices of a diverse array, including marginalised sections such as women, transgender people, farmers, and minorities. Media pluralism refers to various media organisations, viewpoints, and representations of each cultural and social class. At a macro level, the diversity in media ownership (e.g., private, public, state, community) is vital in making the media system plural. In India, the indicators of media pluralism can be monitored depending on geographical, political, and cultural purposes. Media pluralism felicitates ideological differences as well as fair representation in society. The reception of the discursive event regards the reproduction of identities. According to Karppinen (2013), the growing competition in the media market opens the way to more diverse media content. There are four philosophical concepts in media pluralism: affirmative diversity, affirmative pluralism, critical diversity, and critical pluralism. Amongst these four approaches, the critical pluralism approach evaluates public discourse with democratic value in making a legitimate expression. Normatively, the essential viewpoint of pluralism criticises the hegemonic replication in media production, welcoming an alternative viewpoint to encounter the commercial media market. Activity - 3 Using the internet and library resources, research the ownership and control of today's major media companies and state-owned media operations, including how authorities allocate their advertising spending across different outlets. List their major holdings. What impact might this ownership and control have on access, choice, and freedom of expression? Research the laws in place in India to regulate media ownership and control. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Explain freedom of the press.

2) Explain the normative roles of journalism.

3) How does information help democracy?

2.6 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instractions for the course counsellers) Several pedagogical approaches can be applied in teaching MIL among learners. Identify any of the pedagogical approaches of your choice and apply them to the following activities. Guide learners to investigate whether India has a right to information law or national access to information policies. Guide them to access the law and policy of Indian information and to what extent they address development priorities. If there is no access to information law, organise a discussion about what could be done to advocate peacefully. Guide learners to explore if the existing right-to-information laws of India have clauses that address public education on access to information laws or policies. Are these public education programmes being implemented? Promoting MIL is one way to help people understand how to use access to information laws and how they relate to their daily lives. Please search for reputable resources that can help to teach about the right to information. Do you agree that well-informed citizens are better equipped to make decisions and participate in a democratic society? Why? Write an editorial expressing your opinion. Divide learners into three to five groups. Guide them to select one of the Sustainable Development Goals of their choice. Help them become familiar with the United Nations metadata repository: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/ metadata/. Ask them to focus on the official list of indicators and data collected to report on these goals. You can have them discuss and write 5-10 bullet points about why the right to information or an absence of this right can accelerate or hinder the achievement of the SDGs. They should also answer questions such as how MIL can help citizens search for, understand and monitor the progress of the SDGs as shown by data collected through these indicators. What can individuals, groups, and communities do to educate their peers about the SDGs, and how can MIL help their efforts?
2.7 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we have learned about civic participation, one of the desired outcomes of media and information literacy. The concept of civic participation and its prospects have also been explained. The strategies in participation would help us to train ourselves in a better way so that we can harvest fruitful communication. Through the discussion, we have understood the relationship between civic participation and democracy. Civic media literacy has been discussed as the civic intentionality of MIL. The elements of civic media literacy have been given to demonstrate how knowledge leads to participation. Civic media literacy would be useful in making a pedagogical approach to civic participation. We have made points about citizens' right to information and the role of media in making information easily accessible. The explanation of media for democracy covers the freedom of the press, editorial policy, and media pluralism. There was an attempt to make an idea about the objectivity and accountability of media, which is crucial in 44 manufacturing a compatible environment for citizens' civic empowerment.

2.8 KEYWORDS
Right to Information
Civic participation : Civic participation is termed as the participatory behaviour of citizens that revolves around civic sense, a concept mostly related to citizenship and a sense of belonging to the community in different layers, such as the local, state, and national levels. Civic Media Literacy : Civic media literacy is a pedagogical concept that develops skills and competencies in people to act and contribute significantly to the common good. Media Pluralism : Media pluralism refers to the presence of diverse media organisations, viewpoints, and representations of each cultural and social class in society. Right to Information : To prevent the abuse of power by the authorities and to make them accountable to the citizens, the RTI Act 2005 was passed and taken into force on December 22, 2005. This act allows citizens to request public domain documents, records, etc. Freedom of the press : The legal right of freedom of speech and expression, Article 19 (1) (a) in the Indian constitution guarantees the freedom of speech and expression for all citizens of the country, including the press freedom, considering the press as the representative of citizens of India.
2.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Carpentier, N., Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt, P., Nordenstreng, K., Hartmann, M.,
Vihalemm, P., & Cammaerts, B. (2006). Researching media, democracy and participation: The intellectual work of the 2006 European Media and Communication doctoral Summer School. Tartu University Press.
2. Gordon, E., & Mihailidis, P. (Eds.). (2022). Civic media: Technology, design,
practice. MIT Press.
3. Mihailidis, P. (2018). Civic media literacies: Re-imagining human connection
in an age of digital abundance. CRC Press.
4. Paranjpe, V. N. (2018). Right to Information Law in India. Central Law Agency.
5. Sharma, G. (2018). Law of Freedom of Press & Media in India: Contemporary
Issues. Dattsons.
2.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Civic participation effectively promotes democratic governance, which is crucial
for democracy in every form. Civic participation is termed as participatory

Understanding MIL behaviour of citizens that revolves around civic sense, a concept mostly related to citizenship and a sense of belonging to the community in different layers such as the local community, state community and national community. Active citizenship could be initiated and maintained using tools and resources provided directly by the media or government, sometimes by libraries and other information providers.
2. Paul Mihailidis has noted five elements in achieving civic media literacy: caring,
critical consciousness, imagination, persistence, and emancipation.
3. Civic participation in marginalised groups, specifically women, may help to
ensure support from the government and laws of protection. It may make more aware of the rights of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This enhances opportunities for developing quality in society across all classes and sections. The Internet provides various outlets, including the voices of minorities and other marginalised groups. MIL aids with voices in converting capabilities into valued functioning encompassing literacy in Civic renewal participation through digital media and non-digital media. Check Your Progress: 2
1. There is no separate law for the freedom of the press in India. The legal right
of freedom of speech and expression, Article 19 (1) (a) in the Indian constitution guarantees the freedom of speech and expression for all citizens of the country, including press freedom, considering the press as the representative of citizens of India. Those involved in disseminating information and opinions, such as print, electronic, and digital media, enjoy reasonable freedom. However, the press has to follow the reasonable restrictions explained under Article 19 (2) of the Indian constitution.
2. Without journalism, there will be a significant problem in making access to
information a public domain. Journalism helps us get the information we need about our communities, cities, countries and the world. Some factors regarding journalistic practice make it more valuable to citizens. The factors are as follows: accuracy and fairness, organising knowledge, public interest, accountability, independence, the voice of citizens, focus on news elements and balancing privacy and the right to know.
3. Democracy strengthens when citizens can access information held by public
or private bodies indulged in public interest business. Additionally, access to information is needed in decision-making, evaluating public officials, evaluating the governments and facilitating effective public participation. It oversights the stakeholders responsible for the vital work in making democracy well and balances the power of the State. To strengthen citizen engagement, the access and right to information provide the independence and resources that facilitate public management. Access to information in education, health, institutional transparency, agriculture, public utility service, employment and labour rights, peace and inclusiveness cater to the civic utility aspects of the right to information. It looks into preventing corruption with citizens' access to facts and data from governments.

UNIT 3 INTERACTING WITH MEDIA AND
Right to Information
OTHER CONTENT PROVIDERS
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 Content Creation and Curation
3.2.1 What: Role of Content Providers
3.2.2 How: Technologies of Content
3.2.3 Why: Ownership and Media Economics
3.2.4 Who: Targeting Audience
3.3 Representation in Media and Information
3.3.1 Forms of Content and its Representation
3.3.2 Shaping Content: Meaning-Making, Denotation and Connotation
3.3.3 Influence of Shaping Content on Users
3.4 Production/ User-Generated Content
3.4.1 Audience versus Users versus Producers
3.4.2 Agency, Authority and Autonomy of Production of UGC
3.4.3 Rights of Communication and Expression
3.5 Pedagogical Approaches
3.6 Let Us Sum Up
3.7 Keywords
3.8 Further Readings
3.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
The emergence of Web 2.0 technologies has induced the need to understand the nuances of digital media players and their role in creating, shaping and curating content on their websites and platforms. New ICTs have also enabled the advent of newer content providers apart from media corporates, further widening the playfield. On the one hand, some digital media providers, such as online news organisations, rely on creating original content. Most digital media providers, including media corporations and smaller players such as internet libraries, lean towards curating, organising, and presenting content for their audiences. However, one of the pillars of media and information literacy is understanding how these providers shape and curate content and the influence of this process on the audience. Moreover, the placement of such content also impacts how the users visualise the material of the said content. Therefore, the ideology and perception of digital content providers determine the dimensions of content and the knowledge and beliefs of its target audience. This unit will explore the role of content providers on issues of content creation and curation, representation of information, influence on digital media audiences and these 47

Understanding MIL platforms as a site of production for content providers and users. Apart from content intervention, this unit will also emphasise the technological, social, cultural, and economic aspects of such digital content providers.
3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: comprehend the role of content providers in content creation and curation; distinguish the technologies employed by content providers; assess the ownership and media economics of digital content providers and their influence on content creation and curation; critically analyse the ways of representing content and its influence on the users; and understand the scope of opportunities for the audience and users in this process.
3.2 CONTENT CREATION AND CURATION
The context of how content providers construct stories, how they shape the content being presented to us, the techniques they use, and the material they curate are critical to the concept of media and information literacy. In terms of new media, content providers have the agency and act as gatekeepers on what to include and exclude apart from the representational side of it. This unit section will give a brief insight into the role of content providers in content creation and curation and its relationship to technology, the economy and the audience.
3.2.1 What: Role of Content Providers
In a mass media setup, the production aspect rested in the hands of the biggest media conglomerates who controlled what, how, and when to produce. An organised structure with a conventional production style was used in all mass media forms, including print, broadcast, and cinema. The ownership patterns of mass media were also in the hands of fewer and fewer owners. Such media empires extended far beyond the geographical boundaries with horizontal, vertical and cross-media ownership at all stages. According to OECD (2007), the traditional offline media value chain was: Figure 1: Traditional offline media publishing value chain (OECD, 2007) Furthermore, such major players have a substantial presence in new media and 48 technologies. However, the role of individual producers, especially in the blogosphere

arena, has also emerged, wherein narrowcasting, personalisation, and prosumer Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
behaviour are visible. OECD (2007) also reflects upon a reformed value chain for user-created content by content aggregators as well as citizens: Figure 2: Original Internet value chain for user-generated content (OECD, 2007) The playfield of digital media, similar to print and electronic media, has witnessed the emergence of online aggregators in India. In content aggregation, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, etc., are the flag bearers for content creation, production sites and reproduction. Concerning e-commerce market aggregation, Amazon and Flipkart have emerged as prime examples of shopping in tier-1 cities in India. In comparison, ShopClues and Snapdeal cater to the audience in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India. Google News is a major online news aggregator in the online news segment since it essentially provides and aggregates news from third-party media organisations. Similarly, Ola and Uber in the travel segment; Zomato and Swiggy in the food ordering segment; Gaana, Spotify, Airtel Wynk, Jio Saavn, Amazon Prime Music in the music segment; Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hotstar, ZEE5, ALT Balaji in the OTT platform segment and so on have arisen as key online aggregators in India across different spectrums of life. In the modern landscape, the top publishers will be a group that includes Netflix, Amazon, Facebook, Twitter, and Google. The TV companies, magazines and news publishers of old face a fight to retain a relationship with audiences and maintain dominance in quality content production while not merely becoming content creators.
3.2.2 How: Technologies of Content
Under traditional media categories, the content was delivered in textual, visual, or aural forms. Consumers read newspapers and magazines, watch TV and films, and listen to recordings or the radio. However, the Internet today delivers hybrid content, in which aural, visual and textual forms can be intermingled in a multimedia format. Moreover, an option of user selectivity further narrows the content as per the consumer's choice. New media content is non-linear in that the user decides where to go. This offers an increased agency to the audience, in which audience choice is the core component of consumption, as opposed to provided content. Figure 3: Latest technical innovations related to content 49

Understanding MIL Key technological innovations in the media and entertainment sector are disrupting the traditional approach to the dissemination of information, especially the smartphone user base, influx of mobile Internet, broadband connectivity in rural India, public internet access through the Common Service Centres network, e-governance and embracement of digital consumption by both the private and public sectors of the economy. The new technologies of content that have emerged in recent times are:
1.5G internet connectivity: Although India has predominantly been a 2G
market, since 2017, there has been a surge in the sale of smartphone devices owing to a combination of factors like falling data prices, better network coverage, low-cost 4G handsets and the development of locally relevant content. The 5G network will allow the telecom sector to meet the requirements of high-speed data services and support rich content-specific OTT services. With the increase in smartphone users to more than 800 million by 2022, an increasing number of Indians are likely to utilise digital distribution as the primary outlet for video consumption, thus emerging as a real threat to traditional, linear television in India.
2.8K content and hardware: Leading TV manufacturers have started releasing
8K TVs in mature markets like the US, China, Japan and Europe. With the advent of 5G, streaming HD content is expected to become more mainstream, which will benefit the sale of 8K TVs. We have yet to see strong traction in developing 8K content in India, but it is expected to improve in the coming years.
3. Content Delivery Networks (CDN): CDN significantly reduces site latency,
boosts webpage load time, reduces bandwidth usage costs, and ensures the global availability of content. AI-based predictive acceleration and the use of hyper-local CDNs are a couple of key trends in this arena. India is experiencing significant growth in data consumption- specifically concerning the radio; hence, the importance of CDN is more significant than ever before.
4. Augmented Reality/ Virtual Reality: Augmented and Virtual Reality
continues to disrupt how media is created and consumed. Big players like Facebook, Google, Microsoft and Magic Leap are developing innovative products and solutions for the market. Facebook's recent turn towards becoming Meta is due to this technical aspect of the content. In India, VR content production is gaining traction in gaming, tourism, sports, advertising, etc. While the usage of AR/VR is on the rise, widespread adoption is still in its early stages in India.
5. Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning: Artificial Intelligence can
be defined as a collection of technologies capable of sensing, thinking and acting like rational human beings through the Internet of Things (IoT). In recent years, every individual, organisation and government has seen numerous instances of AI enter various facets of their lives- the most common applications being chatbots, facial recognition, image classification, aggregators, recommendation engines and targeted marketing. AI, along with ML, has the potential to solve complex problems effectively at all scales. In India, instant gratification amongst consumers is apparent from the rising adoption of voice assistants at the heart of the smart home and the rise of v-commerce or voice- powered shopping. In combination, these technologies are taking convenience

in the home to a new level. As Google Assistant expands to an increasing Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
number of devices within the home, including smart TVs, the insurgence of AI and ML in our day-to-day lives has created a personalised and integrated approach. The convenience of digital media platforms and the ease of use and access have imbibed the disruption of mass media by the influx of digital media. They are expected to take over as well, dominantly.
3.2.3 Why: Ownership and Media Economics
Apple has its own TV and radio station. Twitter is now broadcasting live sports. Facebook is undoubtedly about to become the most prominent TV channel ever known overnight. Instagram has become an influencer paradise with content generation at its maximum. Amazon's Echo is a whole new media channel, while print publishers are heavily into Snapchat. The lines of production and distribution have collapsed with the emergence of online media. For a brief introduction, vertical integration is when a media company owns different businesses in the same production and distribution chain. For example, 20th Century Fox owns studios in Hollywood, cinemas, TV channels, and DVD rental shops. They own parts of the chain so that they can make money from every part of it. Similarly, horizontal integration is a media company's ownership of several businesses of the same value. A media company can own a magazine, radio, newspaper, television and books. The ownership patterns have also been emancipated extensively with the surge of the Internet. A rise in the number of digital media corporations and conglomerates is proof of the shift. Before the digital age, the mass media adopted the identities of media entities based on ownership. The media units, confined as mainly separate business entities, were named after the physical devices we used to consume media on them. For example, on TV sets, we watched TV made by TV production companies, curated by TV channel executives that we navigated by TV channels that came to us either from TV masts and TV broadcasters or from cable TV companies. These were vertical media platforms that held an identity of their own. However, with the birth of the Internet, the form and function of existing pre-digital units were replaced by first creating the Internet vertical with ISPs, online portals, web editors, digital journalists and photographers, and, of course, digital advertising and digital agencies. With the popularisation of Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, we added social media as a channel. We created infrastructure, roles and strategies to deal with the specific new skills we needed to perfect media in an age of sharing. Then came mobile, with its apps, mobile advertising, mobile ad networks, and mobile journalists making mobile content from mobile strategies. In a nutshell, the lines of vertical media platforms have blurred and coincided. The production and distribution chain has considerably de-shaped and reshaped the media structures. In the case of digital media, horizontal media ownership is much more prominent. Mergers and acquisitions are a common trend across digital media corporations for dominance in the sector horizontally, vertically and diagonally. One of the critical instances of the acquisition of Instagram and WhatsApp by Facebook is that it has become one of the forerunners for the most prominent digital media companies across the globe.

Understanding MIL The trend of convergence and emergence of digital platform companies in India has become relevant as a broader range of businesses in India are looking to build their media and entertainment services, including e-commerce and digital payment companies. Flipkart recently announced its plans to include third-party OTT video content on its app to build user loyalty and social engagement. Paytm, India's leading digital payments and wallet company, launched Paytm First Games with a mix of free and paid games and already reported 30 million registered users within a year. Moreover, data in the case of horizontal media platforms is more magnified and personalised, which helps in narrowcasting for the audience, especially in the case of digital advertising and marketing. Therefore, a clear demarcation has been drawn upon by the advent of digital media based on their ownership patterns.
3.2.4 Who: Targeting Audience
In the past, mainstream media providers, with an eye to profit, provided what they wanted for mass consumption. Because it was oriented to a mass market, audiences took what came and hoped they had sufficient of what they wanted. This was true of magazine content, newspaper stories, television programmes and radio playlists; the producer was the one who decided on the content reaching the consumer. However, the transactional value of content on new media technologies is not as simple as two- way communication. With new technologies, consumers can decide to hear/see/read only the materials they select in advance. With the intervention of content providers, tailor-made content for specific audiences, as per their tastes and preferences, is available due to machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques. This self-created narrowcasting is what gives the audience agency. Audience members can control what comes in their direction on demand- something impossible with conventional mass media processes. Nevertheless, this notion is more complex than it appears. Target marketing and advertising have become rampant in new media technologies, even if it comes at the cost of the privacy of the audiences. Behaviour tracking by the said content providers has often impeded the natural selection process amongst the audience, often leading to a biased form of gatekeeping from the perspective of the content providers. In the following two unit sections, we will discuss the role of content providers in shaping content for audiences and the possible opportunities for audiences to navigate through content effectively. Activity - 1 Select a visual or text of your choice and apply the key questions listed below: What can you learn about the institutions involved in producing this visual/ text? What are the messages conveyed in this visual/text? Who is the intended audience of this visual/text? Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.

1. How has the role of content providers in content creation and curation evolved Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
over time?

2. What are the new forms of content technologies available?

3. Discuss the change in economic and ownership patterns due to new media.

4. How has the relationship of content providers changed with their audiences due to
digital media?

3.3 REPRESENTATION IN MEDIA AND
INFORMATION
Various production processes generate representational texts in any medium, including the mass media. Representation involves:
1. How identities are constructed within the texts;
2. How the processes of production construct them to attract the attention of
the audience;
3. The reception of such representations by people.
3.3.1 Forms of Content and its Representation
The rationale for studying media content is to understand the potential effects of the text and its communication or the appeal of the content to the audience. According to McQuail (2010), the motives for studying media content are: Describing and comparing media output Comparing media with 'social reality Media content as a reflection of social and cultural values and beliefs Hypothesising functions and effects of media Evaluating media performance The study of media bias Audience analysis

Understanding MIL Tackling questions of genre, textual and discourse analysis, narrative and other formats Rating and classification of content Therefore, we need to understand the classification of media content to understand how content providers in the present scenario can shape it. The various types of media content are:
1. Print (newspapers, magazines, direct mail, etc.)
2. Television (cable, network, satellite, etc.)
3. Radio
4. Film and Video
5. Photography
6. Electronic (E-mail, the Web, etc.)
According to OECD (2007), the types of user-generated content are: Figure 4: Types of user-generated content (OECD, 2007) Now that we have understood the varied forms of media content, we must note that different media content formats are represented with diverse perspectives. The representational forms also differ with different types of content, depending on the audience's receptive and cognitive abilities. Therefore, the role of the content provider becomes more evident due to their gatekeeping with regard to the content creation and curation processes, which also determines the meaning-making of the content along with selecting content formats to communicate.
3.3.2 Shaping Content: Meaning-Making, Denotation and
Connotation
Context of Shaping Content
As a construct, identity holds concepts such as class, ethnicity, gender, race and sexuality. An individual's identity relies on multiple parameters and is highly subjective in nature; however, the spectrum of identity depends on its representation. Moreover, the identity construct has its denotations, i.e., how we view ourselves and its connotations, i.e., 54 how others view us. Identity is, therefore, a cultural construction and is external.

Identities are not given in terms of what individuals are as a whole but in more or less Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
arbitrarily selected features they possess. Mostly, individuals have little power to choose what features will be used to identify them; they are determined socially from the outside. Stereotypes based on race, class, ethnicity, gender and sexuality are created through representation. Therefore, in the context of their identity and representation, the subjects are 'framed' according to the intent of the authorial intention. In a socio-historic context, representation refers to a cycle of processes of textual and meaning production and reception in which audiences interpret texts. The Meaning-Making trend of mass communication emerged during the 1970s and 80s when a shift from the positivist approach to a post-positivist approach was witnessed (Baran & Davis, 2015). The advent of the critical paradigm and cultural studies peaked in the United States and Europe. Empirical research into how media encodes a message and the audience decodes it was undertaken at the University of Birmingham Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies by Stuart Hall. The dynamics of media constructing a particular meaning for every message it circulates was extended to the cultural groups. However, at the heart of the meaning-making trend of mass communication, the idea of an "active audience" and their usage of "media content to create meaningful experiences" persisted (Baran & Davis, 2015). Stuart Hall's conception of the Encoding/Decoding theory asserts the framework of knowledge at the encoding and decoding level from the perspective of the producer and audience.
Factors of Influence on Shaping Content
The influence factors on media can be understood from the light of the propaganda model of communication, which elaborates on the five filters of editorial bias proposed by Noam Chomsky and Edward Herman in their book Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of Mass Media in 1988. They are:
1. Size, ownership and profit orientation of the organisation: profit-minting
and the owners' financial interests, usually corporations and controlling investors.
2. Advertising: The major source of revenue for a media organisation, hence,
plays a crucial role in influencing communication.
3. Source of news: The bureaucratic authority and the elites act as the source
of information for media organisations and their leverage as the source.
4. Flak and the enforcers: The negative respondents, e.g. think tanks, who
influence the media's stance on specific issues. The fifth filter stands redundant in the present scenario, as brought to light by Herman and Chomsky. In context with media frames, according to Scheufele (2000), framing depends on three different processes: frame-setting, frame-building and individual-level outcomes of framing. The aspect of frame-setting concerns the media and individual frames and the relationship between the two. However, within the contextual understanding of media frames, frame-building refers to macroscopic mechanisms which deal with message construction.

Understanding MIL Scheufele argues that the activities of policymakers, journalists and other interest groups play a vital role in shaping media frames, which can impact the volume and the character of news messages about a particular issue. By quoting Shoemaker and Resse's (1996) work, Scheufele (2000) states three potential sources of influence on the media frames. They are:
1. Journalist-centred influences rely on the formation of frames by variables such
as ideology, attitudes and professional norms of journalists.
2. Selection of frames: A result of factors such as the type or political orientation
of the organisation.
3. External sources: Political actors, authorities, interest groups and other elites.
3.3.3 Influence of Shaping Content on Users
Berger and Luckmann (1966) have written on the "Social Construction of Reality", which states that people interact with other social systems, which over time creates concepts or mental representations as habitual for us. Berger and Luckmann also brought forth three stages of the social construction of reality:
1. Externalisation: The process by which meaning is carried and communicated
to the outside world
2. Objectification: Process of treating non-objective things as objects.
3. Internalisation: The process of internalising and unquestioningly accepting
the intersubjectively externalised and objectified understandings of a social group as reality. From the perspective of Berger and Luckmann (1966), media is one of the social institutions that construct the social reality of human beings across all social, economic, cultural, and political aspects of our lives. The content providers encode messages in their representational forms and influence our social reality: views of gender equality, women's empowerment, gender groups, persons with disabilities, indigenous peoples and ethnic minority groups, etc. However, the influence of media content on users is not as passive as it seems. The influence of media content on users has been studied extensively since the 1950s with the emergence of the Effects tradition. While initially the effects tradition reflected upon users having no agency or authority over how the media affects them and changes their perception (e.g., Magic Bullet Theory, Hypodermic Needle Theory), the tradition has evolved considerably, as a result of this, focusing upon Limited Effects (Lazarsfeld) and the moderate effects of media on the users. Presently, the Effects research is categorised into three major types of effects: cognitive, affective and behavioural (Baran & Davis, 2015). Cognitive effects involve knowledge or information, i.e. if people know more after being exposed to the media. Affective effects involve feelings, i.e., if the media influences people's feelings. Finally, Behavioural effects involve actions, i.e., if people act differently after exposure to the media. While the effects of the media may differ for different users, content providers have the power to influence our knowledge and understanding of the world beyond our immediate experience. As we have discussed in the previous unit sections, the role of content providers in content creation and curation is influenced by factors such as their

economics, ownership patterns, content technologies, and content providers' meaning- Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
making tradition. The ways of representation of content right from the gatekeeping, selection and the process of encoding at the end of the producer and that of decoding amongst the users with their own interpretations. In light of how users can use their social reality to make sense of the content presented to them, Stuart Hall asserts that media texts are encoded and decoded. The producer encodes messages and values into their media, which are then decoded by the audience. However, different audience members will decode the media differently and possibly not in the way the producer originally intended. There are frameworks of knowledge at encoding and decoding levels. Audiences encode meanings as they are decoding their messages. Audiences have to decode meanings meaningfully in order to encode. The process of encoding is a process of production (because you are creating something). Reception is also a moment of production because we create meanings and understandings. In Encoding/Decoding Theory, Stuart Hall suggested three hypothetical interpretative codes or positions for the reader of a text:
1. Dominant (or Preferred) Reading: The viewer recognises and broadly
agrees with the preferred or offered meaning.
2. Negotiated Reading: The reader accepts, rejects or refines elements of the
programme in light of previously held views.
3. Oppositional ('counter-hegemonic) Reading: The reading is recognised
but rejected for cultural, political or ideological reasons. Therefore, the agency of users in terms of how they decode the media content and how it impacts them is interdependent on the content providers and the users themselves. Activity - 2 Write down all the activities you do during the day, from when you wake up in the morning until you go back to bed at night. Analyse in small groups: Do you need the information to participate in these activities? Write down the information you need next to each activity. For example, you need to know the temperature outside to get dressed; you need to know the traffic situation before you take the bus; you need to know about the economy to know if you are going to ask for a loan. Discuss: How important is information in your daily life? How many decisions would you have difficulty making without information? Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the new forms of content?

2. Discuss how the content providers shape content in the present scenario.

3. What are the extrinsic and intrinsic factors that influence the ways content providers
shape content?

3.4 PRODUCTION/ USER-GENERATED CONTENT
According to Carpentier (2011), user-generated content (UGC) is one of the main innovations in the contemporary media world. The concept of UGC poses several challenges to our notion of media and the traditional forms of audience. Therefore, in this unit section, we will specifically discuss the evolved role of the user as a content provider.
3.4.1 Audience versus Users versus Producers
The role of the audience and their terminologies is directly linked to how we perceive them as content providers. Audience study, therefore, extends beyond diverse media technologies and also reflects on the details of participation with media, the ways people engage with media content and the implications they have for the experience of citizenship and public life. Thus, with Web 2.0 technologies, the narrow understanding of broadcast media audiences as passive recipients of broadcast messages has become redundant and moved towards the "active audience" side. However, many media scholars find the term audience inadequate to explain the things people do with media now, especially with social media and Web 2.0. Jay Rosen (2006) described audiences as "those on the receiving end of a media system that ran one way, in a broadcasting pattern, with high entry fees and a few firms competing to speak very loudly while the rest of the population listened in isolation from one another". Therefore, from this perspective, the concept of the people who were previously mere audiences to mass media has transcended to become users, prosumers (Toffler) and produsers (Bruns, 2007). According to Bruns (2007), the concept of 'produsage' "highlights that within the communities which engage in the collaborative creation and extension of information and knowledge that we examine on this site, the role of consumer and even that of end user have long disappeared, and the distinctions between producers and users of content have faded into comparative insignificance. In many of the spaces we encounter here, users are always already necessarily also producers of the shared knowledge base, regardless of whether they are aware of this role- they have become a new, hybrid, produser." Therefore, with prosumer, Toffler emphasises the interplay of production and consumption; Bruns, with produser, refers to the interplay of media production and usage. However, just as presumption registers the activities of very particular groups of interests and people, produce refers to communities that engage in collaborative media production activities. However, defining and distinguishing between audiences, users, prosumers, and produsers is only sufficient if we understand the nature of these people's participation in Web 2.0.3. 4.2 Agency, Authority and Autonomy of Production of UGC Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
The rise of user-generated content provides new ways for how information, knowledge, and culture to be developed and exchanged, potentially at a lower cost. The Internet has altered the nature and the economics of information production as entry barriers for content creation have significantly declined or vanished and led to the democratisation of media production, distribution costs have declined dramatically, user costs are lower, and there is a much greater diversity of works with shelf space in the digital media being almost limitless. These changes imply a shift away from simple passive consumption of broadcasting and other mass distribution media models to more active choosing, interacting, and creating content and a shift to a participatory "culture". Technological change empowers individuals to "tell their stories" and to produce cultural goods such as music and video to transform the information and media content environment surrounding them (OECD,
2006) . Users may derive a higher value from this content consumption as it may be
more personalised and on-demand, with users having greater control over it. Furthermore, the changed structure of communication and resulting active relationships built across exchange are argued to have important impacts on how citizens and users communicate and express themselves and positively impact social ties and social structures. According to the OECD (2007), there are various distribution platforms for user- created content: Blogs Wikis and other text-based collaboration formats Sites allowing feedback on written works (such as sites which provide writers and readers with a place to post and read stories, review stories and communicate with other authors and readers through forums and chat rooms) Group-based aggregation (such as collecting links of online content and rating, tagging, and otherwise aggregating them collaboratively) Podcasting Social networking sites Virtual worlds (online virtual environment) Content or filesharing sites The dimensions of agency, authority and autonomy concerning the production of user- generated content have been driven by the possibility of engaging with the Internet amongst its users. When we discuss the concept of agency, we mean the opportunity for users of varied demographics and socio-economic backgrounds to have the power to handle their communication on their own. The right to own a device and other ICTs, be a part of a digital platform, and adopt digital skills enable the idea of agency and authority amongst its users to produce user-generated content while adding to the existing media flow of information. Moreover, the possibility of having personalised platforms to blog, vlog, podcast and share information in other formats makes it feasible for the said users to gain autonomy of what and how they want to present their

Understanding MIL information. The narrowcasting and personalisation of information have made it possible for users to obtain the agency, authority, and autonomy to produce, curate and create content and claim the space as their own. Activity - 3 Create a short audio-visual on a relevant social issue using your mobile phone for production and editing.
3.4.3 Rights of Communication and Expression
Freedom of expression is an important fundamental right that is also critical for deafening and upholding other freedoms and rights. We exercise this right daily by exchanging ideas, opinions, and information. Therefore, understanding the means and structures of communication and the regulation of the environment becomes essential for those seeking to realise the freedom of expression. Freedom of expression is guaranteed in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), and Article 19(a) of the Indian Constitution. The UDHR states that "everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any and regardless of frontiers". Similarly, the ICCPR states that "everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his/her choice". Similarly, communication rights, on the one hand, involve freedom of opinion and expression, democratic media governance, media ownership and control, participation in one's own culture, linguistic rights, right to education, privacy, assembly, and self- determination. They are also related to inclusion and exclusion, quality and accessibility to means of communication. Furthermore, the right to communicate originates from the post-Cold War era with the New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO); however, it is closely related to communication rights. Therefore, the tenet of freedom of expression guarantees individuals the freedom to express themselves in words or actions, and the right to communicate stresses the freedom to have an opinion with an emphasis on including one and all. The emergence of Web 2.0 has enabled a horizontal form of communication for content providers and users. The Internet is an open platform enriching the diversity of opinions, various political and societal debates, the free flow of information, and freedom of expression. User-generated content is, in many ways, a form of personal expression, and users/ creators are engaging in the form of democracy where they can directly publish and enable access to their opinions, knowledge, and experience. Preserving this openness and the decentralised nature of the Internet is an important policy objective. Therefore, with the opportunity to explore their ideas, ideologies, and perceptions about various aspects of their lives along with the agency, authority, and autonomy to express themselves across various media platforms, new media technologies enable and empower an individual in the truest sense of the rights to communication and expression.

Check Your Progress: 3 Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Distinguish between audience, users, prosumers and produsers.

2. How do new media users have agency and autonomy concerning user-generated
content?

3. Briefly discuss the rights of communication and expression amongst new media
audiences from the purview of user-generated content.

3.5 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instractions for the course counsellers) In relation to media and information literacy, the following key areas should be examined clearly in order to understand how content providers operate, how they convey meaning, how they can be used, and how the content is presented can be evaluated- including in relation to its international quotient and quality thereof. The following key areas can be underpinned in this unit: Technologies of content Representation in media and information Production and user-generated content Audience as citizens and users/consumers Citizens as users/consumers of provider services In this aspect, the following key questions can be taken forth in classrooms to reflect critically: What is the purpose of this text? How is this produced? Who created it? Who is the intended audience? How do you know? What is the main message? Who benefits, and what do they gain? What are my information needs? How can I identify and define this need? 61

Understanding MIL Does the information I need exist in the form I need it? If not, what action can I take? How do we understand, organise and assess the information found? How can I present this information in usable formats? How can I preserve, store, reuse, record and archive information? How can or should I share this content?
3.6 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we have analysed the various aspects of the interaction of the common public with content providers. From the vantage point of content providers after the emergence of new media technologies, the role of content providers is asserted from content aggregation due to the convergence and emergence of digital media with that of mass media. We have also discussed the new content technologies that have emerged recently, from 5G connectivity to Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) and artificial intelligence and machine learning. Having reflected on the economics of new media based on infrastructure, the notion of multiple media (multimedia) has materialised, which has led towards horizontal media ownership patterns across the globe. On the one hand, audiences have been able to get personalised content due to narrowcasting. On the other hand, target marketing and behaviour tracking have become rampant due to online media. In terms of how content providers represent information, the content types influence its meaning-making aspect. The role of content providers can be observed based on the constructs of identity, representation and framing. Furthermore, this unit has also underscored the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that influence shaping the said content. Berger and Luckmann's (1966) Social Construction of Reality and Stuart Hall's Encoding/Decoding Theory have been considered to emphasise the function of content providers to mould the cognitive, affective and behavioural effects on the audience. Lastly, the role of the public as content providers has been discussed in greater detail on the lines of user-generated content. The concept of audience has been contrasted with that of users, prosumers, and producers. Moreover, the power of new media technologies to empower the public due to their autonomy and control over what they want to communicate and express has also been reflected.
3.7 KEYWORDS
Content Delivery : CDN significantly reduces site latency, boosts webpage Networks (CDN) load time, reduces bandwidth usage costs, and ensures the global availability of content. Artificial Intelligence : Artificial intelligence is a collection of technologies capable of sensing, thinking and acting like rational humans through the Internet of Things (IoT). Produser : Individuals involved in the interplay of media production and usage. Prosumer : Communities that engage in collaborative media production activities.

Communication Rights: Communication rights involve freedom of opinion and Interacting with Media and
Other Content Providers
expression, democratic media governance, media ownership and control, cultural participation, linguistic rights, the right to education, privacy, assembly, and self- determination.
3.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Baran, S. J., & Davis, D. K. (2012). Mass Communication Theory:
Foundations, Ferment, and Future (6th ed.). Wadsworth Publishing Company.
2. Dewdney, A., & Ride, P. (2013). The Digital Media Handbook. London,
CA: Routledge.
3. Herman, E. S., Chomsky, N. (1988). Manufacturing Consent. New York:
Pantheon Books.
4. Lister, M., Dovey, J., Giddings, S., Kelly, K., & Grant, I. (2009). New Media:
A Critical Introduction. Oxfordshire, England: Taylor & Francis.
5. OECD (2007). Participative Web and User-Created Content: Web 2.0, Wikis
and Social Networking. Paris: OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/
9789264037472-en
6. Nightingale, V. (Ed.). (2013). The Handbook of Media Audiences. John
Wiley & Sons
3.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Role of content providers as content aggregators; the emergence of digital
media corporations; convergence of digital media with mass media.
2. Technologies of content: 5G internet connectivity, 8K Content and Hardware;
Content Delivery Networks (CDNs), Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality,
Artificial Intelligence/ Machine Learning.
3. Media Economics: Multimedia; Horizontal media ownership.
4. Narrowcasting and personalised approach for audiences; Target marketing
and behaviour tracking. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Forms of content: Text, fiction and poetry, photos and images, music and
audio, video and film, citizen journalism, educational content, mobile content, virtual content.
2. In the context of their identity and representation, the subjects are 'framed'
according to the intent of the authorial intention.

Understanding MIL 3. Intrinsic factors: Journalistic-centred influences, editorial influence. Extrinsic factors: advertisers, size and ownership of the firm, political actors and other interest groups. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The concept of the people who were previously mere audiences to mass
media has transcended to become users, prosumers (Toffler) and produsers (Bruns, 2007).
2. The changes in the technologies imply a shift away from simple passive
consumption of broadcasting and other mass distribution media models to more active choosing, interacting, and creating content and a shift to a participatory "culture". Technological change empowers individuals to "tell their stories" and to produce cultural goods such as music and video to transform the information and media content environment surrounding them.
3. The Internet is an open platform enriching the diversity of opinions, various
political and societal debates, the free flow of information, and freedom of expression. User-generated content is, in many ways, a form of personal expression, and users/creators are engaging in the form of democracy where they can directly publish and enable access to their opinions, knowledge, and experience.

Interacting with Media and
UNIT 4 MIL, TEACHING AND LIFELONG
Other Content Providers
LEARNING
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Understanding Lifelong Learning
4.2.1 Defining Lifelong Learning
4.2.2 Characteristics of Lifelong Learning
4.3 Basic Understanding of MIL
4.4 Lifelong Learning through MIL
4.4.1 MIL for Teaching and Learning
4.4.2 The Interconnectedness between MIL and Lifelong Learning
4.5 MIL in Learning
4.5.1 MIL in Formal Education
4.5.2 MIL in Non-formal Education
4.5.3 MIL in Informal Education
4.5.4 Scope of MIL in Special Education
4.6 MIL Skills Facilitation
4.7 Pedagogy of MIL
4.7.1 Instructing Process
4.7.2 Instructor's Role
4.7.3 Pedagogical Methods
4.8 MIL and Lifelong Learning in India
4.9 Pedagogical Approaches
4.10 Let Us Sum Up
4.11 Keywords
4.12 Further Readings
4.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
This unit focuses on an important aspect of 'Lifelong Learning' as mentioned in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)- 4, which aims to "Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all." As the phrase suggests, lifelong learning refers to continuous learning throughout one's lifespan and is rightly referred to earning from 'birth to death' and 'cradle to grave'. Lifelong Learning, therefore, goes way beyond a typical formal education of school, college, and University. It can be achieved through formal and non-formal or informal settings. Communication, media Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), and digital media technologies have become indispensable in all these settings. These technologies not only provide greater access to learning opportunities but also have

Understanding MIL the potential to enhance the quality of learning. Therefore, Media and Information Literacy (MIL) is crucial in lifelong teaching and learning. Further, MIL emerges as a discipline in the discourse within lifelong learning due to the multifaceted challenges of the media and information environment. In this unit, you will be acquainted with the concepts related to lifelong learning and MIL. Besides, you will be introduced to the role of MIL in promoting lifelong learning and its pedagogical dimensions.
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: explain the concept of 'Lifelong Learning and describe its various forms; highlight the relationship between MIL and lifelong learning; develop MIL knowledge facilitation strategies; understand the role of MIL in enhancing the teaching and learning process; identify appropriate pedagogical approaches in teaching MIL; and develop different practical applications and activities utilising several pedagogical approaches.
4.2 UNDERSTANDING LIFELONG LEARNING
As stated earlier, generally, lifelong learning, as the term itself, is an essential part of every individual life right from birth till death. It is required for individuals and the sustainable development of communities, societies, nations, and the whole world. Specifically, there is no clear consensus on when the concept of lifelong learning came about in the context of literature usage. However, UNESCO played a crucial role in bringing the discourse of Lifelong learning to the forefront. To begin with, its report "Learning To Be: The World of Education Today and Tomorrow", published in 1972, is the first-ever official document that recognised that education should be both universal and lifelong regardless of age and socio-economic position. It also suggested that such a form of education is not fixed in its content and still must be conceived of as a learning process to express oneself, communicate, and question the world through various experiences to fulfil oneself. The other report, published in 1996 and entitled "Learning: The Treasure Within," viewed learning throughout life as the "heartbeat of society." It highlighted four pillars of lifelong learning, which are - (i) Learning to know: This aspect of learning makes one ambitious for knowledge, way beyond basic education that suggests how to learn throughout one's life. (ii) Learning to do: Learning incorporates the methods and knowledge that one learns into skills packages. (iii) Learning to be: This encourages developing the creative potential of each individual in all its richness and complexity. (iv) Learning to live together: This can be achieved by understanding others 66 and their history, traditions, culture, and spiritual values.

4.2.1 Defining Lifelong Learning MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
Lifelong learning has often been used interchangeably with concepts like adult education, continuing education, recurrent education, open learning, etc. However, Lifelong learning cannot be restricted to any of these terms. Rather, it encompasses all these terms and beyond. As evident in the definition given by the Council of the European Union (2011), lifelong learning refers to all general education, vocational education and training, non- formal education, and informal learning undertaken throughout life, resulting in an improvement in knowledge, skills, and competences within a personal, civic, social and/or employment-related perspective. It also includes the provision of counselling and guidance services. According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), "Lifelong learning is best understood as a process of individual learning and development across the lifespan, from cradle to grave - from learning in early childhood to learning in retirement. It is an inclusive concept that refers not only to education in formal settings, such as schools, universities, and adult education institutions but also to "life-wide" learning in informal settings, at home, at work, and in the wider community". As stated by Longworth and Davies (1996), "Lifelong learning is the development of human potential through a continuously supportive process which stimulates and empowers individuals to acquire all the knowledge, values, skills, and understanding they will require throughout their lifetimes and to apply them with confidence, creativity, and enjoyment in all roles, circumstances, and environments". Lifelong Learning is, therefore, a strategy that enables people to learn at different times, from different agencies in different ways, for different purposes at various stages of their lives and careers. It paves the way for systematic acquisition, renewal, and upgrading of knowledge, skills, and attitudes, along with due recognition, validation, and accreditation of all types of learning, as required by ever-changing conditions.
4.2.2 Characteristics of Lifelong Learning
Lifelong learning, as we have understood, is rather a very broad term and, in a way, lacks a shared understanding of its usage globally due to its differences in implications from country to country. However, some identifiable characteristics associated with the term 'lifelong learning' have begun to emerge. Some of these are discussed below: - Eclecticism: Lifelong learning is characterised by 'eclecticism', where the learner can choose various learning types. It could range from traditional classroom settings to virtual classrooms, homes, or even workplaces that allow individuals to acquire and enhance their knowledge, skills, values, attitudes, etc. It can happen through the use of multiple media, can be self-paced and self-directed, or can have mentors and facilitators. Embedded: This character of lifelong learning points to the increasing integration of learning into everyday tasks and while working. Learning needs to be flexible; therefore, it is often said, 'anywhere' and 'anytime'. Holistic: The other characteristic of lifelong learning is that it is integrated and holistic, where the learning systems must be interconnected at different levels into a coherent exhaustive. Such an atmosphere would allow learners to move within different agencies for accreditation and certification mechanisms, credit transfer, portfolio creation, etc.

4.3 BASIC UNDERSTANDING OF MIL
The emergent pursuit of media and informational content in developing participation, democracy, and active citizenship has indicated a new set of skills and competencies called Media and Information Literacy (MIL). MIL covers a wide range of skills and competencies. As per UNESCO (2013), "Media and Information Literacy (MIL) brings together Information Literacy and Media Literacy, along with Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and Digital Literacy, as a new literacy construct that helps empower people, communities, and nations to participate in and contribute to global knowledge societies." MIL refers to the ability to access, evaluate, utilise, and share information and media content to create new knowledge and enhance participation and co-existence. Component One Access and retrieval of media and other informational contents Component Two Understanding and evaluation of media and other informational contents Component Three Creation and utilisation of media and other informational content Table 1. MIL Competency Matrix (UNESCO, 2013) MIL has a direct connection with the development of knowledge and education in society to ensure empowerment irrespective of the social, cultural, or economic background of individuals. In the 21st century, modern knowledge led by technological shifts introduces the post-modern pedagogy that demands easy and flexible delivery of education and adaptability of multiple resources that the teacher does not control. Parallely, the change in society, educational structure, and work culture produce the requirement of pedagogy of lifelong learning to learn 21st-century skills and competencies. There are two different dimensions of MIL from the perspective of lifelong learning. They are: (i) Lifelong learning through MIL: MIL skills and competencies for lifelong teaching and learning; (ii) Lifelong learning about MIL: MIL as a subject of lifelong learning.
4.4 LIFELONG LEARNING THROUGH MIL
The concept of 'lifelong' also covers aspects of education that reflect a non-authoritative teaching-learning process. Mass media have played an instrumental role in the betterment of the status of lifelong learning in India. At the early stage, various lifelong learning programs produced by government agencies aired on radio channels in English, Hindi, and other regional languages. The responsibility to promote health, agriculture, environment, adult education programs, etc., has also been entrusted to public broadcasting agencies, 'All India Radio', and 'Doordarshan'. With the launch of educational channels - 'Gyan Vani' (radio channel) and 'Gyan Darshan' (television channel), access to lifelong learning opportunities has increased tremendously. Afterwards, digital initiatives like information kiosks (telecenters or cyber cafes) operated in several regions of India have started ensuring better access to information and

knowledge. We must acquire specific MIL skills and competencies to ensure the definitive MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
and positive outcome of the information offered by mass media or any other communication agency. Information gain can only be turned into learning with adequate access, appropriate analysis, and suitable use. Figure 1: Public broadcasters that facilitate MIL (Source: IGNOU, Logopedia, Newson AIR)
4.4.1 MIL for Teaching and Learning
Education is a communication process wherein two-way communication makes the outcome more effective. Educational institutes have shifted the teaching-learning approach from traditional learning to technology-enabled learning that allows learners and teachers to adopt ICT tools such as the Internet, smartphones, computers, mobile applications, etc. Open and distance learning institutions focus on ICT to promote lifelong learning. Therefore, ICT skills have been as essential as subjective knowledge in teaching. For example, creating and distributing learning content for online learning demands ICT skills on both ends, learners and teachers. The rise of ICT-enabled learning challenges learners to develop new skills and competencies. However, according to the optimistic view, online education has paved the way for lifelong learning due to its compatible nature, cost-effectiveness and faster learning mode. Hence, digital skills and competencies can lead the exploration of new world information and boost lifelong learning. However, the new world knowledge system brings online courses, books, libraries, news, and OTT platforms to one's doorstep, offering to learn enormously. Figure 2: ICT tools (Source: Geralt, CC0, via Wikimedia Commons) 69

Understanding MIL MIL, an integrated form, is considered fundamental for lifelong teaching and learning in the contemporary tech-surrounded environment, including ICT or digital skills and competencies. Along with this, MIL serves the 21st-century demand for integrated development. Pardede (2020) classifies 21st-century skills into three categories: learning and innovation, literacy, and life skills. Learning and innovation skills refer to the mental processes required to adapt and improve a modern work environment, which involves what is popularly called the 4Cs (critical thinking, communication, collaboration, and creativity). Literacy skills, sometimes called IMT (information literacy, media literacy, and technology literacy), are concerned with how individuals discern facts, publishing outlets, and the technology behind them. Life skills focus on the intangible elements of every individual's everyday life, including personal and professional qualities.
4.4.2 The Interconnectedness between MIL and Lifelong
Learning The first step in achieving the educational goal is literacy. Basic years of education add feathers to the crown of lifelong learning. In the course of lifelong learning, information plays a vital role; hence, information providers actively contribute to the process in which the attitudes, knowledge, and beliefs of learners are enhanced and developed. Media and information literacy develop throughout life's journey, with basic education as the basis of it. A media and information literate individual can recognise information needs in gaining new knowledge and knows how to locate, access, and retrieve information to learn, analyse, and use the information for lifelong learning. Translating knowledge into insightful practice develops efficiency at every stage of human life. MIL complements this pursuit of outcome inlaid with empowerment. Thus, MIL supplies a mechanism for lifelong learning. MIL and lifelong learning have reciprocal and reinforcing relationships. Thus, these two interlinked paradigms are critical to the global information society. MIL facilitates lifelong learning and develops the following capacities: The learner can be an active explorer and creator. The learner can reflect on life and the environment. The learner can bring self-actualisation and exploration. The learner can understand the cultural meaning of dialogue. MIL helps an individual to be self-motivated and self-directed toward learning. It brings empowerment, helping individuals of all age groups irrespective of social status. MIL often does not glide across the lifespan, depending on the context of an individual. One can drop achieving media and information literacy after a certain period. But, one can't pursue lifelong learning without being media and information literate. MIL and lifelong learning substantially improve the following: Options to form an opinion Quality and utility of education in all its forms Social and economic condition Participation in social, cultural, and political contexts The business of MIL is the pursuit of practical learning that refers to the system whereby a learner amplifies the capacity to develop independently and socially to participate 70 and contribute to society. There is a vast array of opportunities one can find through it.

The branches of MIL, such as media literacy, digital literacy, security literacy, and MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
safety literacy, are primers to open the treasure box of lifelong learning.
4.5 MIL IN LEARNING
The need to adapt to today's interconnected and fast-changing world has made lifelong learning even more relevant. Information is growing exponentially in this digital age, and it is believed that every two years, it doubles. In such a situation, there is a need to be constantly updated with the latest developments in all fields of life. As rightly described by UNESCO's Institute for Lifelong Learning (UIL 2010), this "exponential growth in, and changing nature of information in the digital age, the difficulty of foreseeing the skills sets required for knowledge-based economies, demographic shifts, and increased mobility, the growing concern for unsustainable patterns of consumption and production, are all underlining the relevance of lifelong learning as the conceptual framework and organising principle of all forms of education in the 21st century." Besides learners, teachers can apply MIL skills to what they are teaching for lifelong learning. MIL skills in using ICT tools help this process. The UNESCO ICT in Education Programme listed the following benefits of using ICT in Education: Expand educational opportunities by making education available anywhere, anytime, and anywhere. Improve learning outcomes by making learning more interactive and involving learners in the subject matter. Improve motivation to learn by improving the relevance of content and making learning more fun. Enable education to be tailored to individual learning needs and abilities. Enable locally relevant teaching materials in local languages to be created and disseminated quickly and affordably. Facilitate technology-skill formation, teamwork abilities, and other "21st century skills" among learners. Bring about pedagogical improvements and learner-centered teaching. Provide conditions that permit and promote lifelong learning. Increase the effectiveness and efficiency of education planning and delivery. Recently, ICTs, specifically digital technologies, have played an important role in promoting and enhancing lifelong learning opportunities in all their distinct forms.
4.5.1 MIL in Formal Education
This refers to the highly institutionalised educational system often associated with education. It is characterised by an organised education model, structured and administered by laws and norms, and subject to strict curriculum objectives, methodology, and content. Such a system is "chronologically graded and hierarchically structured" and spans from school to college and reaches the university level. ICT and digital technologies in such a setting can be used to communicate, create, disseminate, store, and manage information. It could be as simple as using a PowerPoint presentation,

Understanding MIL a digital whiteboard during a lecture, interactive multimedia sessions, etc. It could also be blended learning, where certain classes are conducted online, and few are in person. It could be the highly ICT-driven Open and Distance Learning (ODL) system where the teacher and learner are physically apart throughout the learning process, and the communication gap is filled with various communication technologies. Alternatively, it could be purely online education, where the whole teaching and learning process happens virtually through a Learning Management System (LMS). Figure 3: ICT tools for formal education (M.U.Paily, CC BY-SA 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) It has been largely documented now that the meaningful use of ICT has several benefits. Particularly when the teachers are Media and Information Literate, they could use these technologies to provide creative and individualised student options. This will, in turn, lead to higher-order thinking skills among the learners as they can express their understandings better. This will also prepare them to deal with ongoing technological change in a larger society and any dynamic workplace of this century.
4.5.2 MIL in Non-formal Education
This kind of learning refers to any organised, systematic educational activity outside the formal system to provide selected types of learning designed to serve identifiable clientele and educational objectives. It is flexible in terms of curricula and methodology and is usually outside the control or regulation of the bureaucratic formal system. It focuses on developing need-based skills, competencies and attitudes such as tolerance, empathy, unity, etc. It is usually flexible, functional, and cost-effective. A recent example is the increasing availability of non-formal education in the form of Open Education Resources (OERs) and Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs), which are enabled and driven by ICT. Developing ICT or digital skills among certain groups of people can also be done through a non-formal education setting. Non-formal education initiatives have effectively used ICT for mass literacy campaigns, training of health workers, and capacity building under rural community development projects. ICTs in television, radio, Internet, mobile phones, computer kiosks, community learning centres, radio, and video conferencing could interplay in non-formal education. MIL largely inculcates non-formal learning. Benefits of MIL in non-formal education: Develop livelihood skills and contribute to poverty alleviation Capacity building Improve the overall effectiveness of monitoring and evaluation

4.5.3 MIL in Informal Education MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
This is the lifelong process by which every person acquires and accumulates knowledge, skills, attitudes, and insights from daily experiences and exposure to the environment, whether at home, work, or play. Informal education learning does not follow any specific plan and can happen in any setting, and learning occurs unconsciously. Such learning method is individual or group concern rather than institutional or external concern. Such learning can occur through interaction or simply observing family and friends, from travelling, reading newspapers and books, listening to the radio, watching films or television, or surfing the Internet. It can also happen by visiting museums and libraries, community settings, social media interactions, or playing virtual games. It is estimated that 70--90% of human learning falls into this category. Michael Eraut (2000) identified three forms of informal learning. First is incidental and implicit - new facts, ideas, and behaviours are learned without conscious attempts or explicit knowledge of what is being learned. The second is reactive - where learning is explicit but virtually spontaneous. The third is deliberate, clearly intending to acquire new knowledge or skills.
Figure 4: Types of Informal Learning
Again, ICT greatly impacts informal learning, whether the learners are children or adults. Informal learners can immediately access necessary information through search engines like Google. YouTube has also matured into one of the biggest resources for educational content ever. Social media tools enable learners to share knowledge and join learning communities. The worldwide move to free and open publishing also provides informal learners access to many online resource repositories and open education resources (OER).
4.5.4 Scope of MIL in Special Learning
ICT has changed the perception of learning for persons with disabilities. Media and information literacy would help persons with disabilities pursue lifelong learning. With ICT and relevant digital skills, they can overcome the challenges faced during learning. However, the inclusion of persons with disabilities can be assured with universal accessibility in learning design. The design of educational programs using technology- enabled devices ensures easy access by persons with disabilities and helps them overcome their specific limitations. Parallelly, ICT-run assistive technology tools are used to enhance their activities. Televisions, talking calculators, talking watches, remote controls, speech recognition systems, etc., have proven capacity-building tools for

Understanding MIL them. Online education is another option that has made learning easier. They can also benefit from media programs such as television, radio, and digital content. In recent times, smartphones and mobile applications have started to serve the needs of learners. For example, IGNOU's 'IGNOU e-Content' provides learning material through mobile phones. Activity 1 Use online sources to access documents on 'the role of MIL skills in the learning process'. Answer the following questions after reading the documents. How do MIL skills help to learn effectively? Why is MIL vital to making better decisions? Why is life-long learning easier for MIL-competent individuals? Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Define 'Lifelong Learning'.

2. What are the dimensions of MIL from the perspective of lifelong learning?

3. How does MIL help the lifelong teaching-learning process? Give an example.

4.6 MIL SKILLS FACILITATION
In the 21st century, we inevitably encounter challenges regarding privacy, algorithms, media representation, online radicalisation and extremism, fake news, etc. MIL skills help us to deal with those challenges. One can achieve the required skills through training, courses, and daily activities. Some of the action-oriented ways of facilitating MIL skills are: Reading media text (newspaper, radio, television, digital text) carefully Investigating news and sources, context, values of news, and other information Running an online profile to share interests, ideas, photos, or videos. Thinking carefully about online appearance Sharing creative work online on Twitter/Facebook/WhatsApp/any other platform

Communicating user-generated content through blogging or vlogging MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
Using a safe process to store passwords Using images and visual aids to explain or present ideas Using programming software or tools Using digital tools to create, edit, and share textual data, photos, and videos Installing any application with a proper understanding of terms and conditions and security issues Protecting computers and mobile phones with strong and safe passwords Creating levels in a video game Protecting personal data using various methods Developing knowledge about algorithms
4.7 PEDAGOGY OF MIL
The post-modern concept of literacy talks about the influence of information and communication technologies on contemporary society and includes all aspects of media and information literacies in the domain of literacy. Numerous institutions, such as UNESCO and the Center for Media Literacy, have identified the art and science of MIL education. UNESCO's media and information literacy curriculum for teachers has six different segments, and the pedagogy of MIL has been included in one of the segments. The instructional theory of MIL is not rigid in its structure. According to a nation's socio-economic condition, any stakeholder of MIL can develop conceptual knowledge and manage the learning content. However, the teaching of MIL occurs through an activity-based approach where contents with practical applications are delivered. It can be school education, college education, or lifelong learning programs that would add to the MIL level of an individual. In India, most formal education courses (such as school education, college degree, and university degree) do not include MIL as one of their subjects. Nevertheless, different folds of MIL training have emerged as skill enhancement courses. MIL as lifelong learning has emerged through informal and non-formal education for the voluntary pursuit of MIL skills.
4.7.1 Instructing Process
The cognitivism of Piaget has influenced the modern definition of pedagogy. The concepts of cognitive development by Bruner and Vygotsky have laid the foundation for the process of learning, which includes some stages: remember, understand, apply, analyse, evaluate, and create. The activity of teaching MIL not only encompasses delivering education about MIL but also inculcating empowerment. The learners would learn with internalisation of procedures, structures, and skills according to their context. Hence, learners' social, cultural, and economic backgrounds are important in MIL teaching. Rather than following the traditional way of teaching, MIL as a skill-based subject can be instructed using modern pedagogy. The following characteristics of teaching are majorly involved in instructing MIL: Art: The art of teaching MIL consists of the responsive, creative, and intuitive features of teaching. For example, in promoting MIL, game creation can be a creative and

Understanding MIL responsive way of teaching. Game-based learning (GBL) is an effective pedagogical strategy for MIL teachers (Sousa & Costa, 2018), as it can informally attract young and active learners. Craft: The craft of teaching MIL refers to skills and practice-based teaching. The teaching of MIL needs a range of media and information skills. Only a person with good domain knowledge in media and content production, information sources, and digital media can be a teacher of MIL. Science: The science of teaching MIL implies the research-based informed decision- making and theoretical parts of MIL. Teaching the ethical use of information as a MIL Skill with special reference to MIL theories can equip learners with principles such as respect for privacy, intellectual property, fair representation, and non-maleficence.
4.7.2 Instructor's Role
A person who teaches MIL is considered an instructor. There is no fixed approach to teaching MIL. A teacher or instructor can adopt any method or approach for teaching. Therefore, teachers are the principal agents of change in framing MIL (Wilson et al.,
2011) . Empowering through MIL provides ladders toward change - achieving tolerance,
inclusiveness, and pluralism in a culturally diverse society. The teacher plays a role in productive learning. An educator guides the learners' ability to understand problems, tension, and nuances in the journey of the MIL learning process. The key elements of MIL's pedagogy are intentionality, consciousness, reflection, attention, and tenacity. Instruction is a process where a teacher uses techniques to achieve higher achievement. Unlike formal learning, the instructor of MIL deals with the pragmatic value of education. There are several roles of an instructor. Some of those are - An instructor lays down instrumental objectives related to the topic he/she will discuss. A single teaching method should not be used in teaching the whole subject. Hence, the instructor identifies pedagogical approaches for particular units/ topics. The use of the top-down approach (deductive/analysis) and bottom-up approach (inductive/synthesis) are observed. He/she understands the background knowledge of the learner and language skills. The instructor links the lesson topic with the learners' personal experiences. The instructor makes the learning interesting and ensures active learning. The use of interesting strategies such as videos, interactive sessions, and stories are some of the strategies that an instructor follows. An instructor adds important concepts and keywords to the activity, promoting the diversity of knowledge. He/She helps learners identify what they already know and do not know. He/She facilitates the learner's ideas and thoughts

The instructor suggests teaching aids. For example, while teaching the MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
identification of fake news, the instructor can mention using software to identify fake news from the web. An instructor uses strategies to stimulate ideas: brainstorming, mind mapping, and K-W-L (What do I know? What do I want to learn? What have I learned?).
4.7.3 Pedagogical Methods
Several pedagogical approaches can be applied in the teaching of MIL. Identifying one is the teacher's task. Pedagogical approaches to teaching MIL are discussed below: (i) Problem-Based Learning Problem-based learning as a pedagogical method can be used to inculcate MIL learning in developing a coherent learning process. Problem-based learning allows the development of skills and attributes like knowledge acquisition, enhanced group collaboration, and communication. The learners learn by constructing reasoning on what they know and what they need to know about media. Through this, learners can understand how to solve real-life problems. The teacher facilitates the process by guiding and supporting them. An example of problem-based learning in MIL teaching would be to find out the threats and risks of using social media. (ii) Collaborative Learning From an educational point of view, collaborative learning refers to the observation of group work in the teaching-learning process. While using collaborative learning as a pedagogical tool of MIL, the teacher uses the power of engaged learners to process information and concepts. In collaborative learning, learners collaborate as a group to enhance effective learning through MIL-based projects. In this process, learners present their ideas and listen to others' viewpoints, thus understanding an issue, concept, and real-life phenomenon. Working collaboratively to run a Facebook page that promotes the voices of blind people could be a good way of teaching MIL. (iii) Issue-Enquiry Approach The issue-enquiry approach is a way to motivate learners and engage in their learning through an in-depth investigation of a specific issue. It is mainly associated with inquiry- based learning, so it gives more opportunities to be used in MIL skill development. In this method, learners show curiosity in exploring many dimensions of one issue; thus, it promotes a deeper understanding of an issue, which can help solve any problem related to the specific issue or help make an evidence-driven decision. New skills can be achieved through identification of the issue, access to the major underpinned ideas, clarification of the facts with analysis, interpretation in personal space, and acting to get the desired outcome. An example of the usage of this approach in MIL teaching would be exploring the pattern of gender representation in a specific newspaper. (iv) Scientific Enquiry Scientific inquiry involves evidence-based techniques in gaining new knowledge and skills. Scientific inquiry can be used to instruct MIL from a subjective or objective point of view. In this approach, knowledge is acquired following a scientific sequence

Understanding MIL of inquiry: observing, questioning, finding existing answers to the question, planning for new input to the answer, gathering pieces of evidence, analysing data, and writing the explanation. Examples of scientific inquiry in MIL could include investigating the impact of hate speech, the rise of fake news, etc. (v) Case Study A case study is a method of in-depth and multifaceted exploration of a single event, issue, or phenomenon. However, more than one event or issue is studied in collective or multiple case studies. This method is used in multiple disciplines, including media studies. It can be a potential approach to teaching MIL. The real-life events can be studied by adopting a systematic method of inquiry. Identification of the problem, data collection, data analysis, and reporting are all steps of conducting a case study. In this approach, a learner can get the answer for how and why an issue has occurred. An example of a case study would be an inquiry into the influence of COVID-19 on e- health interventions. Figure 5: Pedagogical methods used in MIL (vi) Textual Analysis Textual analysis is a method to analyse and interpret various forms of text. Denotation and connotation - subtext, symbolism, values, codes, and conventions of media texts- can be understood using this method. There are many dimensions of textual analysis, such as semiotic and content analysis. Textual analysis of film, social media content, and advertisement can give knowledge about contemporary cultural, social, and political interpretations of facts and phenomena. In teaching MIL, textual analysis would be a great method of learning technical, symbolic, and narrative media and informational content codes. MIL teacher can ask the learner to do a textual analysis of a video from YouTube or a piece of news collected from the web. The learner would find out the text's source, purpose, audience, textual features, claims, etc.. (vii) Contextual Analysis Contextual analysis is a method to analyse any issue, event, or phenomenon within a specific social, cultural, political, or economic context. Contextual analysis has been used to identify opportunities and threats to any contemporary issue. MIL is used to

understand the relationship of a concept related to MIL with theoretical approaches. MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
For example, learners can undertake a project on a ramification of social media content and video games according to a specific point of view or context. (viii) Translations Translation is a process where a source text in a particular language is communicated using another language. This method allows learners to translate a media text into another language to communicate with a specific language-based target group. For example, a report by PIB in English can be translated into Hindi to form a news report for Hindi-speaking people. (ix) Simulations Simulation refers to mimicking the function of any system, organisation, or team to represent a real-world situation. It involves students in role-playing to learn skills and concepts related to a specific activity. It can be an effective method in teaching MIL. A teacher can begin the lesson by placing learners in real-world scenarios to act and react skillfully according to the situation. MIL teachers can use simulation to demonstrate the function of a film production team. To do that, the teacher makes the students play the role of the film production team members. (x) Production Production is a student-centred learning approach where the teacher draws the guidelines for excavating knowledge by applying the learning process by doing. Media and information content production employs a few phases, such as pre-production, production, and post-production, that offer experiential learning. It seems engaging and memorable for the learners to gain complex knowledge of MIL. Learners can creatively express themselves while producing media texts (print, audio, audio-visual, picture). Production enhances the creation as well as the communication skills of a learner. As an example of production, learners can make a documentary or digital story on homophobia and upload it on any social media platform. Activity - 2 Perform the following tasks:
1. Identify any of the five pedagogical approaches to teach issues related to
MIL.
2. Describe the key components that make the pedagogical approaches effective
for teaching and learning MIL.
4.8 MIL AND LIFELONG LEARNING IN INDIA
Lifelong learning has become a topic of discussion in the discourse of education and training policies worldwide. It has been endorsed by national and international policy actors, including UNESCO, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the World Bank, ILO, etc. Over the last decades, Lifelong learning has been discussed in Indian education policy documents. The Report of the Education Commission (1964-66) discusses that education goes beyond schooling and is a lifelong process. The National Policy on Education in India - 1986 (modified in 1992) stressed lifelong education in achieving universal literacy and institutionalising

Understanding MIL opportunities for everyone to continue the education of choice and at convenience. The critical development of skills and knowledge required for the development of society has kept the government active in translating documents into practices. As a result, governments, NGOs, and universities have started many programs to promote lifelong learning. The National Adult Education Programme (NAEP) of the Indian government (1978) influenced UGC to endeavour lifelong learning with numerous activities such as continuing education, refresher courses, and post-literacy. Colleges and universities have initiated UGC-funded programs to accomplish the mission of new knowledge in society. With the introduction of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-2012), the Government of India integrated the idea and scope of lifelong learning. Most recently, the National Education Policy (NEP) - 2020 puts forward adult education and lifelong learning. The union budget for 2021-2022 drafted the increase in the availability of access to resources and more advanced materials. The objective was to impart 21st-century skills like digital and financial literacy to the learners through online mode. India is a developing nation where change is an unremitting phenomenon. One of the benefits of lifelong learning is that it 'adapts to change'. Lifelong learning would help learners to be aware of the changes in different areas such as technology, culture, and society. While acknowledging the existence of lifelong learning, we can't deny the thrust of new media technology. Globalisation and expansion of ICT have served as forcing factors in updating skills and knowledge to be globally competitive. The Indian economic position depends on the labour force's skills; hence, providing them with relevant skills is important. Lifelong learners would be able to embrace new topics that they find compelling. Thus, they can look for a new career opportunity and work position. The large population of India suffers due to joblessness. Lifelong learning allows one to win the job market by being well-versed in the job field. Life, society, and media are changing throughout the century. Therefore, every human should process lifelong learning to be updated with the ever-modern world. Indian traditional philosophies have promoted deep, continuous learning from generation to generation. The understanding is that the notion of lifelong learning is the key to the learning society, and it is not a system of education but a principle of it. Since many crises keep hampering the nation and its population, lifelong learning through MIL and learning about MIL can seek practical remedies for the crisis at macro and micro levels. MIL is linked with challenges of openness and changes, thus encompassing stability and continuity in lifelong learning. The three main focuses of lifelong learning about MIL are expansion, innovation, and integration. Expansion can be done by multiplying the learning situation, creating new motivation, and offering all kinds of opportunities. Innovation can be provided by creating alternative learning patterns in diverse situations. Integration escalates the process of expansion through adequate linkage. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write about the instructor's role in teaching MIL.

80

2. What are the three characteristics involved in teaching MIL? MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning

3. How can you apply textual analysis in teaching MIL?

4.9 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instractions for the course counsellers) Numerous pedagogical approaches can be applied to promote MIL among learners. Identify any of the pedagogical approaches of your choice and apply them to the following activities: (i) Guide learners to learn the usage of digital media tools for storytelling. The teacher can initiate the process by giving ideas: what to do? How do you identify a topic or platform? How do you plan the storytelling? (ii) Make small groups of students and ask the groups to find out the possible threats and risks they encountered or can encounter in the future while using social media. They can be asked for ways to solve this problem. Students can: Examine the risks and threats one can encounter while using social media. Explore what they already know about underlying threats and issues related to it. Identify information and tools necessary to be safe and secure using social media. Evaluate possible ways to solve the problem. (iii) Develop a lesson plan to teach 'analysis of message or information'.
4.10 LET US SUM UP
The present policy of the Indian education system has focused on institutionalising lifelong learning. Lifelong learning has been discussed here as an empowering factor in the growth of an individual. You have learned about the definitions, concepts, and characteristics of lifelong learning. Its characteristics would help you understand and put the meaning in a larger frame. MIL consecrated in the learning environments has been discussed with the explanation of formal, non-formal, informal, and special education. The unit would also help you explore more pedagogical approaches to teaching MIL. You have read about how media and information literacy (MIL) improves lifelong learning. Discussing MIL, information, digital literacy, and 21st-century skills would exploit learning that can bring curiosity to know more on this topic. Moreover, the unit would be a foreword explaining lifelong learning through MIL, core areas, and implications in various ways.
4.11 KEYWORDS
Lifelong Learning : According to the Council of the European Union, lifelong learning refers to all general education, vocational education 81

Understanding MIL and training, non-formal education, and informal learning undertaken throughout life, resulting in an improvement in knowledge, skills, and competencies within a personal, civic, social and/or employment-related perspective. Informal Education: Informal learning is the lifelong process by which every person acquires and accumulates knowledge, skills, attitudes, and insights from daily experiences and exposure to the environment, whether it is at home, at work, or play. ICT : According to the UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2009), "ICT refers to a diverse set of technological tools and resources used to transmit, store, create, share, or exchange information. These technological tools and resources include computers, the Internet (websites, blogs, and emails), live broadcasting technologies (radio, television, and webcasting), recorded broadcasting technologies (podcasting, audio and video players, and storage devices), and telephony (fixed or mobile, satellite, video/video-conferencing, etc.)." Pedagogy : Pedagogy can be defined as the general principles of effective teaching that make a difference in the intellectual development of learners.
4.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Brockett, R. G. (2014). Teaching adults: A practical guide for new teachers.
John Wiley & Sons.
2. Dave, R. H. (Ed.). (2014). Foundations of lifelong education: Studies in lifelong
education. Elsevier.
3. Fedorov, A. (2017). Media and information literacy education dictionary.
Scholars' Press.
4. Field, J., & Leicester, M. (Eds.). (2003). Lifelong learning: Education across
the lifespan. Psychology Press.
5. Sethy, S. S. (Ed.). (2018). Higher education and professional ethics: Roles
and responsibilities of teachers. Taylor & Francis.
4.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. According to the Council of the European Union, lifelong learning refers to all
general education, vocational education and training, non-formal education, and informal learning undertaken throughout life, resulting in an improvement in knowledge, skills, and competencies within a personal, civic, social, and/or employment-related perspective. It also includes the provision of counselling and guidance services.

2. There are two different dimensions of MIL from the perspective of lifelong MIL, Teaching and
Lifelong Learning
learning. They are: (i) Lifelong learning through MIL: MIL skills and competencies for lifelong teaching and learning; (ii) Lifelong learning about MIL: MIL as a subject of lifelong learning.
3. ICT skills have been as essential as subjective knowledge in teaching. The
creation of learning content for online learning and the distribution of that content demand ICT skills from both learners and teachers. The rise of ICT- enabled learning challenges learners to put about new skills and competencies. Hence, digital skills and competencies lead the exploration of new world information and boost lifelong learning. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The teacher plays a role in productive learning and guides the learners'
understanding of problems, tension, and nuances in the journey of MIL learning. MIL's pedagogy's key elements are intentionality, consciousness, reflection, attention, and tenacity. Instruction is a process where a teacher uses techniques to achieve higher achievement. Unlike formal learning, the instructor of MIL deals with the pragmatic value of education.
2. The three major characteristics involved in instructing MIL - are art, craft,
and science.
3. In teaching MIL, textual analysis would be a great method of learning technical,
symbolic, and narrative media and informational content codes. MIL teacher can ask the learner to do a textual analysis of a video from YouTube or a piece of news collected from the web. The learner would find out the text's source, purpose, audience, textual features, claims, etc..

UNIT 5 COMMUNICATION AND
INFORMATION, TEACHING AND
LEARNING
Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.2 Communication in the Digital Era
5.2.1 Information Exchange
5.2.2 Knowledge Sharing
5.3 Communication in Learning Spaces
5.3.1 Educators' Role in Communication
5.3.2 MIL Skills and Competencies for Communication
5.4 Information in Digital Age & Media Literacy
5.4.1 Context and Concepts
5.4.2 Information Culture
5.5 Engagement with Digital Technology for Pedagogical Development
5.5.1 Technology Intervention and MIL
5.5.2 Critical Thinking and Decision-Making Abilities
5.5.3 Learning Styles
5.6 Evaluation of Instruction Processes & MIL
5.7 Pedagogical Approaches
5.8 Let Us Sum Up
5.9 Keywords
5.10 References
5.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
Communication is at the core of human existence. It is the extension of information dissemination or exchange to create meaning in life. In teaching and learning, it is crucial to understand that communication occurs in different situations and through various modes. The term communication has been around for ages and has been inherited by humans for generations now, using different techniques and methods. Since immemorial, people have communicated using symbols, sounds, gestures, and words. The basis of communication is exchanging information and creating new information for the social construction of language. With the development of technology and the availability of various mediums for communication, the exchange of information has changed its meaning from knowledge sharing to inclusive meaning, making strategies for social development.
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
84 After reading this Unit, you will be able to:

to analyse the relationship between information and communication; Communication and
Information, Teaching and
to understand the dynamics of digitalisation in the teaching and learning process; Learning and to understand the application of information and communication theories using MIL skills.
5.2 COMMUNICATION IN THE DIGITAL ERA
Communication in the developing era of technology is going through transitions and getting better platforms with the introduction of new technology then and there. The concept of interaction has changed in computer-mediated communication for all spheres of life. Communication is not about just the sender and receiver anymore; the platform and the features that the platforms allow play a significant role in the smooth flow of communication. As Bharadwaj, Ravinder, and Kannan (2004) state, "the Internet has been acclaimed as the Information Super Highway of the Twenty-First Century". The internet plays a significant role in the dissemination and exchange of information. The modern age, or this contemporary period, is known as "the information age", where networking and communication are made more accessible. The cyber-world or virtual reality is the new world where interactions occur at high speed without many inhibitions. According to Kumar (2011), it is natural and a requirement for existence to use communication resources to share experiences through symbols and mediated interaction. On the other hand, it is known that the lack of communication can be disorienting altogether; it can lead to anxiety and impaired judgment. Though this is sensory deprivation, the "information explosion" changed lives enormously. There have been tremendous changes in the teaching system due to ICT usage, furthering the computer- based education system. ICT empowers people regarding education and communication (Sarkar, 2021). The three main factors driving lives in the 21st century are "speed, virtuality, and networking", which has become an intangible part of people's lives (Rivoltella, 2008).
5.2.1 Information Exchange
According to Gill (2021), the Digital ecosystem (DE) is known as "a set of distributed, adaptive, and open socio-technical systems. Being parts of such ecosystems, individual persons, public and private organisations are becoming increasingly dependent on each other" (Krogstie, 2012). There is a discourse that a digital ecosystem is an intricate network of the individual as well as organisational actors (informational organism) "who need to share information for value co-creation." It is also considered that the ing of information the informational organisms) is critical and core to these DEs. The concept of information is explained as a group of related data elements. This data contains the content as well as documents. The exchange of such data is a basic necessity to keep the world going. Data elements represent raw facts as data attributes, documents, and content containers. It is relative as well as contextual in nature. Information exists where the participants are taken from unknown to known, that is, "information deficit" to the known value of information recognition or information gain. Information exchange is moving from the unknown to the known, seeking knowledge of various concepts in varied capacities.

Understanding MIL 5.2.2 Knowledge Sharing
Knowledge sharing is exchanging information between friends, family, or community. It is an intangible value that is used to create a competitive advantage. Knowledge sharing varies based on the culture and structure of the organisation or institution. Knowledge sharing is at the base of decision-making and problem-solving. Tacit Knowledge stays within the mind of people and is expressed in the form of skills and a value judgment. The way knowledge is shared according to the platforms is based on the understanding that is made available between the various entities. Tacit sharing of content occurs via different ways of socialisation. Meanwhile, embedded knowledge sharing occurs when the information in the form of knowledge is shared through delineated products or routines. Creating a knowledge-based economy has become the goal of many developing countries, especially those that suffer from a scarcity of natural resources. The creation of knowledge-based economies in developing countries involves the development of their higher education systems. The integration of digital technologies into the higher education systems of these countries has the potential to contribute to their development and restructuring. (Gasaymeh, 2017). MIL skills and competencies play a significant role in this process, where the information available must be exchanged to create new knowledge. However, MIL skills enable an individual to do the same systematically.
5.3 COMMUNICATING IN LEARNING SPACES
The basic communication process, which has a sender (originator/source), message (content), channel (medium), receiver (responder/decoder), and feedback (receiver to the sender and vice versa), is the foundation of most communication models. This kind of process takes place in any social interaction space. We will consider the models and discuss the various elements concerning educators' and learners' roles in the process. The discussion will also lead to the changing dynamics of the roles played by all participants in the teaching-learning process with digitalisation. In this context, it is necessary to understand how Media and Information literacy skills can enhance the roles played by all participants in the pedagogical system. Learning is considered the process of "acquiring knowledge or skills" and has transformed the learning environments and led to new learning paradigms like e-learning, ubiquitous learning, and social learning. This is considered linked to the emergence of technology, digital media, and wireless communication. These new setups lead to the paradigm shift of the learning scenarios with varying characteristics such as permanency, where the information is available until the learner purposely removes it; the second character is the easy accessibility of information; another characteristic is the immediacy and flexibility by which information can be retrieved using various technologies, the crucial characteristics of interactivity where learners can interact with peers, teachers, and experts efficiently and effectively through different media in the various communities of learning. There is a characteristic of context awareness where the environment can adapt to the learners' real-life situations to provide adequate information. Moreover, finally, the most relevant is digital-mediated communication, where the network of connected devices and ubiquitous technologies are extended to various learning environments.
5.3.1 Educators' Role in Communication
The Shannon and Weaver (1949) model discussed the linear concept of communication, 86 which is one way of communication, and the information is transferred to the receiver

through a medium. They emphasised the importance of the message or the meaning Communication and
Information, Teaching and
contained by the message as the most crucial part. It enhances semantic accuracy. Learning Suppose this model is considered in the education scenario. In that case, it will be considered redundant as the information transmission system or the "sage on stage" role of a teacher or educator is nowhere to be seen now. Communication is not linear anymore. On the other hand, the learner's role has changed from a passive audience to an active audience where they participate and engage in negotiation. The knowledge-gaining process is now different, with Information Communication Technology taking the role or charge of information dissemination, and the role of the teacher is restricted to instructing to use the information in a constructive direction and to engage in critical thinking for real-life scenarios. However, the elements of noise can be interpreted as miscommunication or communication barriers that occur due to multiple reasons, for example, a plethora of knowledge, reliability issues with information produced and created, the inability to interpret in the proper context, etc. This model applies more to the mediums like radio, telephone, etc. The developing technology changes how learners use radio, telephone, or the internet for education. On the other hand, Gerbner's Model is based on the perception of an event and the perceptual dimension (the process of interaction and negotiation). In the process, the intense method of matching our external stimuli to the preconceived notions and experiences exists; in this context, the educator's perception plays a vital role in understating the concept and the notions and then further explaining it to the learners and conveying it to the learner. The idea of the event and the message formulated by the teacher need critical thinking and evaluation skills (negotiation at a higher order) for the teacher to convey the same. The learner's perception, the preconceived notion of the existence of an event and the acceptance of information from the teacher. The learners gather knowledge from the early stages of life in various social environments. Therefore, the concepts the learners construct during the period of teaching and learning affect the further education process. For that matter, the idea of an event perceived by a learner in one particular situation may alter according to the dimensions explained by the new educator.
Figure 1: Laswell's Model of Communication
Another model, Laswell's Model, forms the base of general mass communication concepts, theories, and models. The report writing in journalism follows this concept of the varying stages of mass communication: 87

Understanding MIL Who
Says what In which channel To whom With what effect In the above model, for the education context, when the teacher communicates with the learner, the medium and the message play a vital role in the effectiveness of the message. For the teaching-learning process to succeed in the context, it is necessary to understand the dimensions of the medium as well as the need for the message; on the other hand, for the learners, the message plays a major role, though the role of the medium is crucial too and the effectiveness of feedback process is also necessary for the overall transaction of the communication to complete. Newcomb's Model of communication focuses majorly on the role of communication in the social structure and the relationships constructed in society. It is a triangular model highlighting the crucial role of context or society in which communication exists. According to Newcomb, communication is "maintaining the equilibrium for the social system". In this model, A and B are the sender and receiver of the message, and adding to this is the X factor, which is the social environment in which they exist; if we consider this model for the present scenario of education, the social environment is always less of formal or informal learning. In this context, the role of the educator becomes crucial. Though it is not a linear method of communication, it still highlights the importance of the environment in which society. Also, in this category, if A changes his or her relationship to X, B will have to change his or her relationship with X or A. This stands in case the teacher creates a homely environment or changes the pedagogy to online mode, and the student also needs to change his or her outlook towards the environment or the teacher. In this model, the role of understanding the changing dynamics of digital education comes into play for both the teacher and the student. On the other hand, Westley and MacLean's communication model highlights the intervention of the third party between the sender and receiver or, for that matter, between the event and the final receiver and brings across the idea of distant experience in the foreplay. This model also stands the importance of feedback; here, in the case of an event, suppose A sends a message about the event to B (X1). Here, B is unaware of or was not in direct contact with the event; therefore, there would be interpretations of A that may intervene or enhance the message's quality (Fiske, 2010). Activity - 1 What are the communication tools we use in our daily lives? List any 4 of them in the space given below. a) b) c) d)

Check Your Progress: 1 Communication and
Information, Teaching and
Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer. Learning
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the use of ICT in the education system?

2. What do you mean by tacit knowledge?

3. Why is Shannon and Weaver's model redundant in the 21st century?

5.3.2 MIL Skills and Competencies for Communication
Media and information literacy are the capabilities to be efficient and effective in a digital society, which becomes essential competencies if we consider them, especially in learning environments. To effectively curate, produce, and participate in the digital ecosystem, it is necessary to acquire these competencies. It is no longer about accessibility to media; it is about the critical usage of the mediums to fulfil the varying needs of human interaction, knowledge enhancement, and lifelong learning. This enhances effective learning systems, mainly as discussed in earlier sections, in the context of communication models in the education environment. In the new learning environment The set of competencies offered by MIL will better address the challenges that all people experience due to the characteristics of new learning environments: new gadgets, constant connection, and widespread access to all types of information everywhere, anytime, and anyplace. In this setting, MIL becomes a crucial element of 21st-century learning. MIL will promote improved usage and comprehension of 21st-century learning settings.
5.4 INFORMATION IN DIGITAL AGE & MEDIA
LITERACY
5.4.1 Context and Concepts
The information exchange in the digital era is making communication easier. Big data and the development of other innovations are crucial regarding information exchange in the social structure. The developing communication science embraced information theoretic principles to examine group decision-making, interpersonal control in relationships, mass communication, and talk and quiet sequences in dialogues following Attneave's seminal "Applications of Information Theory to Psychology." Nevertheless, for the application of information theory in social sciences, there were some cumbersome tasks of data collection and logical interpretation, which were ineffective until the

Understanding MIL emergence of Big Data and its contribution to understanding the information theory. Critical analysis of the data providing information for the betterment of society is now more accessible and more effectively done at various levels. Recently, advanced human interactions have been taking place in digital settings, which has rekindled interest in using information theory in the social sciences. While academics may now compute measures that converge pretty slowly due to the new amount of behavioural "big data" and our computational capabilities, the development of the social sciences has also resulted in a rise in interest in more complex nonlinear techniques and measures. There are ways in which the entropy within the information theories is applied for various business organisations to set trading policies. Their usage of elements of information theory provided for mathematical computation by Shannon and Weaver, which is used in the basic communication process to read common human behaviourism patterns for social development.
5.4.2 Information Culture
Since the inception of information theory, it has been clearer how to quantify information than what information is. What is the development of information culture, and for the interpretation of various information, Hartley and Shannon provided effective formulae for calculating the volume of information. However, these formulas provide false results when used in unrelated areas without comprehending the information phenomenon. The first reference to information culture is typically attributed to Mariam Ginman, a researcher from Finland. According to Ginman (1993), an information culture is flexible and innovative, mainly when management is receptive to information about the external environment. An information culture was offered as a desired and required condition for the company to be effective and competitive. However, this view of information culture has gained many dimensions through the contribution of other researchers (notably Oliver & Foscarini, 2014). It is now also known as a concept that encompasses all cultural settings, including positive ones where effective and efficient systems and processes have already been implemented and are being used adequately by all relevant parties, in addition to those highly negative ones where information may not be well managed. The varying information culture dimensions may be used to concentrate on various locations and settings, or they can be utilised to give an extensive scope for a comprehensive look at the problems and difficulties associated with information and data management in corporate or community contexts.
5.5 ENGAGEMENT WITH DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
FOR PEDAGOGICAL DEVELOPMENT
There are multiple digital technology theories, such as Digital learning theories and approaches, such as RAT, SAMR, TPACK, Digital Blooms, Connectivism, Design Thinking, and Peeragogy, which help teachers develop curricula that get students to use technology to research, curate, annotate, create, innovate, problem-solve, collaborate, campaign, reform and think critically. Dr. Joan Hughes created the RAT Model, an assessment framework meant to assist teachers in accurately self-evaluating their use of technology in the classroom. It entails the following actions: The use of technology that functions as a different means to the same educational purpose but does not alter the recognised teaching techniques is referred to as a

replacement. Amplification: While the work stays the same, technology's amplification Communication and
Information, Teaching and
assures the expansion of instructional methods' efficiency, efficacy, and productivity. Learning Transformation refers to the creative and novel curriculum, education, or learning change. The goal is to examine the extent of technology use in the classroom using the RAT Model while ensuring it fulfils its intended purpose. On the other hand, the SAMR model was created to assist teachers in integrating technology into their lessons. The concept, made popular by Dr. Ruben Puentedura, helps educators plan, create, and integrate technologically-assisted digital learning experiences. The objective is to change how kids learn so that they succeed at greater levels. A flexible framework of methods for peer learning and peer knowledge development is known as pedagogy. It is a process through which individuals collaborate to create and apply knowledge, as opposed to pedagogy, which deals with transferring information from teachers to pupils. Peeragogy's adaptability and scalability are its main advantages. The learning mindset and techniques explored through pedagogy projects are usually used in wikis, organisations, hackerspaces, schools, and other networked collaborations throughout society. These kinds of models, theories, and concepts lead us to understand how digital technology is integrated into the learning framework for communication and information exchange. The crux for us is to understand that there are multiple ways in which education technology can be utilised with maximum capacity using MIL.
5.5.1 Technology Intervention and MIL
According to Lewin and Lundie (2016). There is a promise that digital education will change the ways of teaching and learning through the vast array of digital learning resources and radically restructured virtual learning experiences, often accepted without considering the "problematic social, ethical and epistemic assumptions underpinning such changes.". In his study, Richard Davies emphasises the relational aspect of communication in modern internet-related technologies. He makes a case for a more thorough analysis of the opportunities for regular, small-scale social interactions in online learning. Different and occasionally opposing conclusions may be formed regarding the potential of digital interactions for humanising education between the levels of abstraction (Florida, 2011b) of information theory examined by Lundie and of user interface investigated by Davies.
5.5.2 Critical Thinking and Decision-Making Abilities
Governments worldwide have accepted that ICT plays a significant role in improving education, and massive investments have been made in this area for a while. In the previous decade, information and communication technologies (ICT) have rapidly developed globally for work and business purposes. There is an emphasis by Krumsvik (2011) states that there is a growing importance of addressing teachers' self-efficacy regarding the teaching-learning practice with ICT. The various attempts to use ICT in education have been met with multifaceted reactions. Halevi 2017 Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Why is MIL critical in the 21st century?

91

Understanding MIL 2. What changes does Big Data bring to social sciences?

3. Why is Information Culture, according to Ginmann?

5.5.3 Learning Styles
A key component of learner preferences is learning style. The idea that different people retain knowledge in various ways is expressed by the phrase "learning style" (Ozata & Ozdamar-Keskin, 2014). It involves how an individual perceives, processes, and interprets information (Simsek, 2004). The literature has a variety of models for learning styles. To clarify our study goals, we have picked the VARK Model by Fleming and Mills and the Learning Style Model by Grasha and Reichmann. Figure 2: VARK Model of learning (Source: Preply.com Images, CC BY 2.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) The VARK (Visual et al.) Model, developed by Fleming and Mills in 1992, refers to four learning style dimensions connected to applying experience and practice (simulated or actual). Visual learning style (representing any information in visual aids such as maps, diagrams, charts, etc.) Auditory learning style (information that is "heard or spoken."), Reading-writing learning style (the preferred style is when information is displayed as words), Kinesthetic learning style (the preference is related to the usage of understanding and practice, simulated or actual). It can be said--and is generally acknowledged--that the development of digital environments has led to the emergence of new learning paradigms like e-learning, ubiquitous learning, and social learning. Learning has undergone a significant transformation as acquiring knowledge or skills. Digital media, emerging technology, and cellular communications with constant connectivity have all been closely tied to

this rise (Ehlers, 2012). Due to the influence of information and communication Communication and
Information, Teaching and
technology, the widespread use of computers at the beginning and linked devices in the Learning latter have encouraged a paradigm change within education.
5.6 EVALUATION OF INSTRUCTION PROCESSES
& MIL
According to Media Information Literacies, there are multiple ways in which various communication and information theories can be conceptualised. In the 21st century, the idea of communication and its role in teaching-learning has transformed into digitalised language, and perpetual changes in how interaction is transforming according to the four stages of the education revolution emphasised the need for changes in the concept of Media Information literacy. Information literacy is the capacity to identify when information is needed, where to find it, how to evaluate it, and how to effectively communicate that information in all its forms, traditional and modern. Media literacy is the capacity to access, analyse, evaluate, and create media in all forms. Here, it is clear that there is already a sizable overlap between the two concepts. Not surprisingly, they are frequently used virtually interchangeably for convenience. The changes in the Education Revolution were evidently from 1.0, done through the method of sage on stage and lecture-based. It was dedicated to how the individual memorised; the literacies of that time were based on basic writing and reading skills. There was a lower level of engagement in the traditional classroom setup. Whereas internet-based learning emerged with time, computer literacy played a significant role; cautiously, one by one, education paved the way to adopting technology in a more integrated manner. Student participation increased, and the usage of open-source information led to the emergence and development of information literacy. The concepts of education technology in communication and interaction lead to developing skills and competencies using communication tools in teaching-learning. Later, with the education revolution, 3.0 usage of different sources of information came into existence, and digital technology penetrated in every way where consuming and producing knowledge while using and analytically approaching a concept came into existence. With this, media information literacy took charge; each revolution changed the kind of literacy needed at each level. Students learned to consider the purpose of various types of information before starting the deeper level job of analysing information. Determining the information's reliability will be quite helpful in determining the information's objective later. The media and other information sources like libraries, museums, archives, and the internet keep information for various reasons. These reasons include informing, educating, entertaining, gathering together, providing access, facilitating teaching and learning, promoting values and rights, and preserving cultural heritage. With the later stages of education, even electronic media permeated many of our waking hours thanks to video streaming websites, social networking platforms, digital billboards, and podcasts. Moreover, while we have profited from this widespread and immediate connection in our personal and professional lives, it also presents numerous difficulties. The pupils must acquire particular techniques to navigate and filter this potentially overwhelming sea of information since 4.2 billion individuals are using the internet and sending and receiving countless messages.

Figure 3: The idea of the Internet of Things (Source: Wilgengebroed on Flickr, CC BY 2.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) The Education Revolution 4.0 has introduced the transformation of artificial intelligence technology, machine learning, and the Internet of Things, empowering students to learn, communicate, and inform by creating knowledge and getting involved in the epistemology of truth and identity of existing ideas and concepts. It is based on skill development and enhancement of latent skills needed to use technology at best. Gaming literacy, library literacy, and other tangents of MIL are deeply entangled with the featured tools and elements of innovation in education.
5.7 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instractions for the course counsellers) Suppose we use content providers such as libraries, archives, museums, media, and digital communications companies in learning spaces. In that case, we need to consider our ways of educating the students on the following: How are we using them? How do they impact how information is communicated to learners? How do learners communicate among themselves? How do learners communicate with educators? What data are the providers collecting about this process, and with what implications? Communication and information models provide a framework for conceptualising the place of MIL within the education and learning experience. These models provide the opportunity to closely examine the role of educators, learners, and information providers in learning spaces.

Communication and
Information, Teaching and
Learning Figure 4: Depiction of Shannon and Weaver Model of Communication (Einar Faanes, CC BY-SA 3.0 <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/>, via Wikimedia Commons) A simplistic model was proposed using an engineering paradigm after the Second World War (Shannon & Weaver, 1948; Schramm, 1954; Berlo, 1960). This model assumes the process is linear and begins with a message's sender. In contrast, many would highlight the structuring agency of channels and their driving force, as well as shaping by genres and formats of the message. While the model also misses significant issues of community, culture, power, and engagement with meaning, it does identify elements that can give limited insights, such as: Sender (originator/source) Message (content) Channel (medium) Receiver (responder/decoder) Feedback (receiver to the sender and vice versa as the loop continues).
5.8 LET US SUM UP
This unit has introduced you to two significant elements of society, communication and information, which create the basis of social constructs. The need for these two is also pertinent in the education system, where the teaching and learning process is executed only through the appropriate construction of information culture through various communication stools and platforms. In the 21st century, when the tide of communication has taken a turn and transformed the way the exchange of information, especially in the education system, Media Information Literacy Skills stand to be an evident requirement for quality education. In this Unit, we have discussed the role of communication concerning the digitalisation of networks, tools, and mediums to communicate. Then, we discussed the phenomenon of information exchange and how knowledge is shared during this exchange. We have also learned the role of MIL skills in developing tacit knowledge. Then, we learned how communication has changed according to the learning spaces, which led to the discussion about the educator's role and the skills needed to fulfil their directed roles. The need for MIL is specific and describes how it will help in a better way. Here, we discussed various communication models and conceptualised the need for MIL. Then, the Unit discussed various MIL skills for lifelong learning and knowledge enhancement. Then there is the vivid description of how to integrate MIL skills into the information age as well as within the media culture in the teaching-learning process, then the engagement of digital technology concerning pedagogical development 95

Understanding MIL is discussed, which is like the crux of how MIL skills can be integrated through pedagogy within the framework of information theories, communication models and digital technology concepts applicable in the teaching-learning process of 21st century, the technological intervention engages the learner for better critical thinking abilities and decision-making abilities. Further, according to the learning styles, evaluation of instruction processes is done using MIL skills, where the application of MIL skills according to the education Revolution and its tools are introduced in detail, which leads to the conclusion of the chapter.
5.9 KEYWORDS
Information Exchange : Information exchange moves from unknown to known, seeking knowledge of various concepts in varied capacities. Knowledge Sharing : Knowledge sharing is exchanging information between friends, family, or community. It is an intangible value that is used to create a competitive advantage. Information Culture : A concept encompassing all cultural settings, including positive ones where effective and efficient systems and processes have already been implemented and are being used adequately by all relevant parties, in addition to those extremely negative ones where information may not be well managed. Learning Style : Involves how an individual perceives, processes, and interprets information.
5.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Henderson, M., & Romeo, G. (2015). Teaching and digital technologies: Big
issues and critical questions. Cambridge University Press.
2. LeFever, M. (2011). Learning styles. David C Cook.
3. Oberg, D., & Ingvaldsen, S. (2016). Media and information literacy in higher
education: Educating the educators. Chandos Publishing.
4. Sundar Sethy, S. (2012). Online education. Meta-Communication for Reflective
Online Conversations, pp. 282-291. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-61350-071-
2. ch017
5.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check your Progress: 1 Ans.1 There have been tremendous changes in the teaching system due to ICT usage, furthering the computer-based education system. ICT empowered people in terms of education and communication.

Ans.2 Tacit Knowledge stays within the mind of people and is expressed in the form Communication and
Information, Teaching and
of skills and a value judgment. Learning Ans.3 Suppose Shannon and Weaver's model is considered in the education scenario. In that case, it will be considered redundant as the information transmission system or the "sage on stage" role of a teacher or educator is nowhere to be seen now. Communication is not linear anymore. On the other hand, the learner's role has changed from a passive audience to an active audience where they participate and engage in negotiation. Check your Progress: 2 Ans.1 The set of competencies offered by MIL will be better able to address the challenges that all people experience due to the characteristics of new learning environments: new gadgets, constant connection, and widespread access to all types of information everywhere, anytime, and anyplace. In this setting, MIL becomes a crucial element of 21st-century learning. Ans.2 In applying information theory in social sciences, some cumbersome tasks of data collection and logical interpretation were ineffective until the emergence of big data and its contribution to understanding information theory. Ans.3 According to Ginman (1993), an information culture is flexible and innovative, mainly when management is receptive to information about the external environment. An information culture was offered as a desired and required condition for the company to be effective and competitive.

Block-2
MIL, Society and Ethics

BLOCK 2: MIL, SOCIETY AND ETHICS
One of the major focus areas of propagating media and information literacy is educational interventions. There are two dimensions to this intervention - one is teaching about media, and the second one is teaching through media. Teaching about media is a process through which the basic tenets of media literacy are taught. Teaching through media is about using various media platforms for teaching-learning processes. In our previous block, we concentrated on teaching about media and in this block, you will learn more about the teaching through media. Besides that, you will understand the role of various stakeholders in the media and communication processes and how these processes are linked with multiple social institutions.
Unit 6: Learning Theories and MIL
Learning theories are pivotal in understanding how individuals acquire knowledge and skills. In the Media and Information Literacy (MIL) context, these theories help elucidate how people process, evaluate, and apply information from various media sources, enhancing their critical thinking and information management abilities in the digital age. The unit discusses theories for how individuals acquire knowledge and understanding as they grow, the importance of social interaction in learning, the role of observation and modelling in learning, and the mental processes involved in acquiring knowledge. It also discusses the importance of revisiting and deepening understanding over time, observable behaviours, active learning and personal meaning-making. It further extends to learner-centred education and the significance of networked knowledge in the digital age. The unit helps to comprehend how individuals acquire, process, and use information effectively in the digital age, fostering critical thinking and informed decision-making.
Unit 7: Enabling Environment for MIL in Learning Spaces
The unit uncovers the diverse and enlightening experiences of MIL educational interventions worldwide by tracing MIL education's rich history and practices. The evolution and impact of MIL, highlighting the unique approaches and contributions from North America, is noteworthy. Beyond this, insights from the vast and dynamic landscapes of Asian Experiences of MIL Training are provided. It informs about the distinctive approaches, challenges, and innovations that have emerged in Asia, providing valuable insights into the global tapestry of MIL education. Additionally, it provides overarching Global Conventions for MIL Training that serve as guiding frameworks in this field. These conventions play a pivotal role in shaping the direction and standards of MIL education internationally. The unit provides a comprehensive and nuanced understanding of MIL's multifaceted nature, guided by global experiences and conventions.
Unit 8: Audience: National and Global Contexts
The term 'audience' has a rich history, evolving from its origins to become a central concept in media and information literacy (MIL). Understanding 'audiences' involves understanding their dynamic roles in receiving, interpreting, and responding to media content. Theories on audiences stretch across various traditions, including structural, which focuses on media's influence on individuals; behavioural, which examines audience responses; and cultural, which explores the socio-cultural context of audiences' interpretations. The future of audiences is evolving in the digital age, with changing media consumption patterns and the rise of interactive and participatory media. As

MIL, Society and Ethics MIL adapts to this shifting landscape, understanding audiences remains essential, guiding educators and researchers in fostering critical thinking and responsible engagement with media and information. Approaches to audience research vary, ranging from quantitative studies to qualitative analyses. This unit stresses understanding audiences as it remains essential in shaping effective media strategies and communication practices.
Unit 9: Technology, Media and Society
Technology plays a pivotal role in the intricate relationship between media and society. Technological advancements have significantly impacted the evolution and practice of freedom of expression. Digital platforms and social media have given individuals unprecedented avenues to express their opinions and access information, shaping the dynamics of public discourse. Technology has transformed the purpose of media in society, expanding its reach and immediacy. The unit discusses how technology-aided media is a powerful tool for disseminating information, educating the public, and fostering civic engagement. It also discusses the challenges of misinformation and the erosion of traditional gatekeeping functions. Journalists now navigate a digital landscape where accountability takes on new dimensions. Alternative media outlets have emerged to address these challenges, leveraging technology to provide independent and diverse perspectives. While empowering, this unit explores technology and demands vigilance in combating misinformation, protecting privacy, and bridging digital divides.
Unit 10: Freedom, Ethics and Social Accountability
Freedom, ethics, and social accountability are paramount for Media and Information Literacy (MIL). Self-regulation, governed by codes, laws, and ethics, guides how media and information are disseminated and consumed. A robust Code of Ethics underpins responsible journalism, emphasizing essential values such as accuracy, fairness, and impartiality. As technology advances, new ethical areas emerge, challenging traditional norms. In the digital age, a Code of Ethics for New Media addresses issues like online privacy, digital citizenship, and combating misinformation. Citizens, too, have rights and ethical responsibilities in the MIL landscape. The freedom to access information comes with the duty to use it responsibly and to discern reliable sources from falsehoods. This unit explores these critical themes, emphasizing the ethical values and responsibilities that underpin MIL in an era where information and media play pivotal roles in our lives and society. With this understanding of media in society, you can approach and handle all your media and communication interactions more meaningfully.

Learning Theories and MIL
UNIT 6 LEARNING THEORIES AND MIL
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 Learning Theories and MIL
6.3 Piaget's Theory of Cognitive Development
6.4 Vygotsky's Theory of Learning
6.5 Social Learning Theory
6.6 Cognitive Learning Theory
6.7 Bruner's Spiral Curriculum
6.8 Behaviourism Learning Theory
6.9 Constructivism Learning Theory
6.10 Humanism Learning Theory
6.11 Connectivism Learning Theory
6.12 Pedagogical Approaches
6.13 Let Us Sum Up
6.14 Keywords
6.15 Further Readings
6.16 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
6.0 INTRODUCTION
Learning theories help us understand how people learn and acquire knowledge over time. But more importantly, they help us understand how the educational system can help us learn. Learning theories can help us teach media literacy in more effective ways. There are many different learning theories, like Behaviourism, Cognitive Learning Theory, Constructivism, Social Learning Theory, Humanism, and Connectivism. Each of these theories has its perspective and framework, which can help us understand how to use media literacy for better teaching and learning. Knowing the different theories and frameworks will help teachers use media literacy correctly to teach students how to handle media responsibly. This unit also looks at how media literacy education has been standardised worldwide. Over the past 40 years, there have been many attempts to include media literacy in school programs, and various declarations have provided guidance and policies to improve and make media literacy education consistent. We will also explore different learning theories and how they can be used in media literacy education, along with many global decisions regarding media literacy training.
6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to:

MIL, Society and Ethics 1. grasp major learning theories and how they relate to media literacy;
2. describe how various learning theories can help with media literacy education
programs and activities;
3. assess and criticise current media literacy education methods using learning
theories;
4. utilise important ideas and principles from learning theories to create media
literacy lesson plans and activities;
5. apply learning theories to comprehend the mental, emotional, and social aspects
of media literacy learning; and
6. judge the success of various media literacy educational efforts.
6.2 LEARNING THEORIES AND MIL
Learning theories help us determine how people learn and gain knowledge and how teaching can make it easier. These ideas are important for media literacy education, where we teach people to think carefully when they see or make media stuff. There are many learning theories, like behaviourism, cognitive learning, constructivism, social learning, humanism, and connective, and they all focus on different parts of learning, which matters for media literacy teaching. Behaviourism is a way of learning that says outside things, and rewards make us act a certain way. It believes we learn by doing something repeatedly until it becomes a habit. In teaching people about media, we can use behaviourism by giving rewards or punishments for how they use media, like watching or making messages that follow certain rules or values. Cognitive learning theory says that our thinking is crucial for learning. It includes things like paying attention, remembering, and solving problems. This theory believes that learning happens when we think about what we're learning and create new knowledge. In media education, we can use this theory by telling students to think carefully about what they see in the media and analyse it smartly with their brains. Constructivism in learning says learners must create knowledge by actively working with the material. According to this theory, learning happens when we use what we already know to understand new things. In media education, we can use constructivism by urging students to use what they already know when they look at media messages and to make their messages based on their thoughts and experiences. Social learning theory highlights how people learn by watching others and interacting with them. According to this theory, learning happens when we observe, copy, and get input from others. In media education, we can use social learning theory by prompting learners to talk with friends about what they watch and ask for advice on their media creations. Humanism in education underscores the distinct characteristics of each learner, including their feelings, encounters, and convictions, as well as their ability to guide their learning. In media literacy instruction, humanism can be employed by tailoring the learning process to each learner's specific requirements and preferences while promoting self-guided learning concerning media consumption and creation.

Connectivism is an educational theory highlighting connections and networks' Learning Theories and MIL significance in the learning journey. It suggests that learning happens when knowledge is created and shared within networks rather than solely through individual experiences. Connectivism can be put into practice when teaching media literacy by motivating learners to interact with various media outlets and critically examine media messages, considering the interconnections between media networks. In this setting, let's explore different learning theories and how they relate to teaching media literacy.
6.3 PIAGET'S THEORY OF COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT
Conservation: Piaget introduced the idea of conservation, which means that alterations in how something looks don't alter its basic qualities, like size, weight, or quantity. Formal operation: adolescents attain formal thinking skills during the last phase of cognitive growth. This includes the capacity to ponder abstract ideas, employ hypothetical thinking, and perform logical deductions. Piaget's cognitive development theory connects with media literacy in various ways. Piaget highlights how actual experiences, especially during early developmental stages like sensorimotor and pre-operational, are vital for cognitive growth. Media literacy offers students these real-life experiences, aiding their world comprehension and fostering critical thinking abilities. Secondly, Piaget's theory highlights that students learn best when they actively build their knowledge by interacting with their surroundings. Likewise, media literacy stresses the significance of actively engaging with media content to comprehend its messages and assess its effects critically. Thirdly, Piaget's theory proposes that how our thinking grows is affected by our interactions with others and our culture. Learning about media literacy can assist students in grasping the cultural and social settings where media messages are. Jean Piaget's cognitive development theory is a significant and widely recognised framework aiming to clarify how individuals progress in their thinking abilities from infancy to adolescence. Key aspects of Piaget's theory pertain to individual learning theories and their relevance in media literacy education. The key aspects of Piaget's Cognitive Development Theory include stages of development, schemas, assimilation and accommodation, object permanence, egocentrism, conservation, and formal operation. Stages of development: according to Piaget, learners go through four clear cognitive growth phases, each having distinct qualities and constraints. These phases encompass the sensorimotor phase, pre-operational phase, concrete operational phase, and formal operational phase. Schemas: Piaget suggested that children create mental structures, known as schemas, to structure their encounters and understand the world. These schemas always change and adjust as the child engages with their surroundings. Assimilation and accommodation: Piaget proposed that students blend fresh

MIL, Society and Ethics knowledge into their existing mental frameworks using assimilation while adapting and expanding these frameworks to fit new information through accommodation. Object permanence: Piaget proposed that babies don't understand that things still exist when they can't see them until they acquire object permanence, a skill usually acquired at approximately eight months old. Egocentrism: Piaget suggests that children tend to be self-centred in early childhood and find it challenging to grasp how others see things. Conservation: Piaget introduced the idea of conservation, which means comprehending that alterations in how something looks don't alter its basic characteristics, like size, weight, or quantity. Formal Operations: During the last phase of cognitive growth, teenagers attain formal operations, where they gain the capacity for abstract thinking, employ hypothetical reasoning, and participate in logical deduction. Piaget's cognitive development theory has connections with media literacy in multiple ways. To begin with, Piaget stresses the significance of hands-on learning in cognitive growth, particularly during the sensorimotor and pre-operational stages. Media literacy can offer students practical encounters that aid their world comprehension and foster critical thinking abilities. Next, Piaget's theory underscores the significance of students actively building their comprehension of the world through their interactions with their surroundings. Likewise, media literacy underscores the importance of actively engaging with media to grasp its messages and to assess its influence thoughtfully. Piaget's theory proposes that social interactions and cultural surroundings play a role in cognitive growth. Media literacy aids students in grasping the cultural and social settings in which media messages are made and consumed and how these settings can impact their outlook and convictions.
6.4 VYGOTSKY'S THEORY OF LEARNING
Lev Vygotsky's learning theory highlights how social interactions and cultural surroundings influence the growth of our thinking abilities. The key aspects of Vygotsky's theory include: Vygotsky suggested that learning happens in the Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD), which is the gap between what a learner can do independently and what they can achieve with the help of someone who knows more. Social Interaction: Vygotsky stressed the significance of social engagement in learning. He asserted that when learners interact with individuals who possess greater knowledge, they can absorb new ideas and abilities better. Scaffolding means offering temporary assistance to aid learners in finishing tasks they can't do on their own. Scaffolding aims to slowly decrease the assistance as the learner gets better at the task. Cultural tools: culture equips us with aids, like words and symbols, which make learning and mental growth easier. These aids are passed on during social exchanges and are crucial for cognitive advancement.

Students use talking to themselves out loud, known as private speech, to control Learning Theories and MIL their behaviour and thinking. Over time, this private speech becomes internalised as students grow and transform into inner speech. Collaborative learning, working with classmates, means learning with friends and can be useful in boosting cognitive development. This is because it allows learners to interact socially, exchange information, and discuss meanings, which can be very beneficial. Vygotsky believed that learning happens when people interact, and media literacy can promote teamwork in learning by involving students in conversations and group tasks. Students can learn from their peers by sharing their views and thoughts about media content. Vygotsky stressed the significance of language in education, and media literacy can assist in language development by giving students chances to express their ideas about media content. It can also enhance students' critical language skills by teaching them how to analyse and assess the language used in media materials. Vygotsky held that a student's cognitive growth is influenced by their cultural environment, and media literacy can help students grasp the cultural setting in which media content is created and consumed. By learning about diverse cultures and viewpoints through media, students can better understand the world around them. Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) refers to the gap between what a child can do independently and what they can do with assistance from someone more knowledgeable. Media literacy can be a supportive tool for students learning by allowing them to engage with media content slightly above their current comprehension level. With guided practice, students can acquire new skills and knowledge.
6.5 SOCIAL LEARNING THEORY
Social Learning Theory, also called Social Cognitive Theory, is a learning theory that highlights how watching and interacting with others influence our actions. The primary aspects of this theory include: Observational learning, the Social Learning Theory, suggests that people can acquire fresh behaviours by watching others and seeing the outcomes of their actions. This is also known as modelling/vicarious or learning through observation. The outcomes of actions can impact the chances of those actions happening again. Reinforcement can be positive (providing rewards) or negative (imposing punishments). Self-efficacy is a person's belief in their capability to accomplish a task. Self-efficacy can be shaped by personal encounters, observing others, and receiving input from peers. Mental processes like focusing, recollection, and drive are significant in acquiring knowledge and conducting oneself. These mental activities can determine if a person observes a specific behaviour and how effectively they recall and imitate it. Reciprocal Determinism: the Social Learning Theory proposes that behaviour, surroundings, and individual factors all interact in a two-way manner. In other words, behaviour can affect the surroundings, surroundings can impact behaviour, and individual factors can affect both behaviour and the surroundings.

MIL, Society and Ethics Social and cultural contexts can influence behaviour. For instance, cultural customs and beliefs can impact appropriate or favourable actions. Social learning theory underscores the importance of watching, copying, and imitating to acquire knowledge. According to this theory, individuals learn by observing others and the outcomes of their actions. Media literacy, on the other hand, can be seen as a method to implement the principles of social learning theory. It aids students in nurturing their critical thinking abilities regarding media messages. There are various connections between social learning theory and media literacy, and here are a few ways that exemplify it: The social learning theory proposes that students can gain knowledge by watching others. Media literacy allows students to watch and assess media content, including media figures' actions and viewpoints. Through this method, students can develop the ability to identify and assess how media messages affect their beliefs and actions. The social learning theory highlights the significance of modelling, which means showing a behaviour or attitude for others to copy. Media literacy can aid students in comprehending how media figures are depicted and the influence of these depictions on actual behaviour. For instance, media literacy can enable students to identify the impractical body ideals shown in media and inspire them to oppose them daily. The social learning theory proposes that individuals tend to repeat actions that bring them positive rewards. Media literacy can assist students in comprehending why certain behaviours are depicted in media messages and the potential outcomes. This comprehension empowers students to make informed choices regarding embracing specific behaviours or attitudes. According to social learning theory, individuals are inclined to participate in actions they think they can accomplish effectively. Media literacy aids students in boosting their self-assurance by offering chances to practise scrutinising and assessing media content. As a result, students can acquire the abilities and self-belief necessary to make well-considered choices regarding their media consumption.
6.6 COGNITIVE LEARNING THEORY
Cognitive Learning Theory is an educational theory that highlights the significance of mental processes in influencing behaviour. The key aspects of Cognitive Learning Theory include: Information processing: Cognitive Learning Theory suggests that learning consists of working with information, which includes paying attention, perceiving, remembering, and solving problems. People arrange and make sense of information using mental frameworks known as schemas. Schemas are thinking patterns that assist individuals in comprehending and classifying information. The Cognitive Learning Theory presents the idea of metacognition, which relates to a person's understanding and management of their thinking processes. This involves observing, assessing, and adjusting one's cognitive actions. Learning works best when it matters and makes sense to the learner. Meaningful learning occurs when you link new information to what you already know and comprehend.

The significance of transfer means using what you've learned before in fresh situations. Learning Theories and MIL To boost transfer, we can aid learners in linking their new knowledge with what they already know. The significance of feedback during the learning journey. Feedback offers learners insights into their performance and assists them in adapting their learning methods. Cognitive learning theory examines how people handle information to make choices and tackle issues. It asserts that learning happens in the mind through processes like sensing, focusing, remembering, and problem-solving. In media education, we can consider applying cognitive learning theory principles to enhance students' ability to think critically about media messages. Let's explore the connections between cognitive learning theory and media literacy. Cognitive learning theory proposes that perception is an engaged procedure that includes picking, arranging, and comprehending sensory data. Media literacy aids students in nurturing critical thinking abilities related to perception by instructing them to identify various forms of media communications and grasp how these messages are crafted to attract audiences. The cognitive learning theory proposes that attention is a finite resource that needs to be distributed among various tasks. Media literacy can aid students in enhancing their attention abilities concerning media by instructing them to concentrate on essential elements of media messages while disregarding distractions. According to cognitive learning theory, memory is an engaged process that includes encoding, storing, and recalling information. Media literacy can assist students in honing their memory skills regarding media by teaching them how to recall crucial information in media messages and identify common patterns in different media messages. The cognitive learning theory proposes that problem-solving is an intricate procedure encompassing recognising a problem, creating potential answers, assessing the likely results of each answer, and picking the finest one. Media literacy can aid students in cultivating their media-related problem-solving abilities by instructing them to scrutinise and assess media messages, detect possible problems or concerns, and devise efficient remedies.
6.7 BRUNER'S SPIRAL CURRICULUM
Jerome Bruner's Spiral Curriculum is an educational framework that underscores the significance of revisiting key concepts and ideas during the learning process. The primary characteristics of Bruner's Spiral Curriculum include: Learning should follow a spiral path, where students revisit essential ideas and concepts at higher levels of sophistication. This is the idea of conceptual progression. This approach enables a deeper and more intricate comprehension of concepts as time progresses. Active learning, where students should participate in tasks that demand advanced thinking abilities like problem-solving and critical thinking. Discovery learning, wherein students are motivated to investigate and unearth fresh concepts and notions independently. This facilitates a more profound and enduring educational encounter.

MIL, Society and Ethics Multiple Representation underscores the significance of employing various forms to illustrate concepts and thoughts, like visuals, sounds, and physical experiences, to accommodate diverse learning preferences and boost comprehension in academic settings. Scaffolding involves educators offering assistance and direction to students while they grasp fresh concepts and notions. Scaffolding ensures that students can expand upon their current knowledge and comprehension. Employing real-life contexts to assist students in grasping the significance and value of their learning is significant. This approach enhances the meaningfulness and attractiveness of learning for students. Bruner's Spiral Curriculum is an educational concept that highlights the significance of using previous knowledge and personal experiences to aid learning. According to this theory, students should be exposed to intricate ideas progressively and organised, commencing with basic concepts and gradually advancing from there. Media literacy can be seen as an approach to implementing Bruner's Spiral Curriculum principles to assist students in honing their critical thinking abilities concerning media communications. Here are a few methods in which Bruner's Spiral Curriculum and media literacy are interconnected: Bruner's Spiral Curriculum underscores the significance of using existing knowledge as a foundation for effective learning. Media literacy supports students in enhancing their critical thinking abilities concerning media by leveraging their previous media- related knowledge and experiences. To illustrate, students can progressively and systematically familiarise themselves with media literacy principles, commencing with basic ideas and steadily progressing to more advanced notions. Bruner's Spiral Curriculum highlights the value of hands-on learning and investigation. Media literacy can prompt students to actively interact with media messages, critically assess them, and investigate diverse approaches to interpreting media content. This emphasises the significance of discovery-based learning, encouraging students to independently explore and uncover fresh information. Media literacy can promote this type of learning by offering chances for students to investigate and unearth novel ways of understanding media texts. Bruner's Spiral Curriculum underscores the importance of feedback in enhancing learning. Media literacy can offer students feedback regarding their comprehension of media messages, aiding them in grasping how these messages are crafted and can be deciphered from various perspectives. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are behaviourism's fundamental concepts and underlying beliefs, and how
can they be utilised in teaching media literacy?

2. How does cognitivism explain the cognitive processes involved in media literacy Learning Theories and MIL
learning, and what are some strategies for enhancing these processes?

3. What are the main differences between constructivism and connectivism, and how
can they inform the design and assessment of media literacy educational interventions?

6.8 BEHAVIOURISM LEARNING THEORY
Behaviourism is a learning theory that concentrates on visible actions and how rewards and penalties affect these actions. The key aspects of the Behaviorism learning theory include: Stimulus-response (S-R) Connections: learning happens when a specific stimulus triggers a particular response, forming S-R connections. The significance of using rewards or punishments, also known as reinforcement, to influence and repeat certain behaviours. Reinforcement can be positive (providing rewards) or negative (removing unpleasant stimuli). The significance of punishment in moulding behaviour is that it reduces the chances of a behaviour reoccurring by introducing an unpleasant stimulus or taking away a positive one. Conditioning is wherein behaviour is acquired by repeatedly connecting a specific stimulus to a specific reaction. Generalisation happens when a reaction to one signal is also seen in response to similar signals. Conversely, discrimination occurs when a response is limited to the initial signal and doesn't extend to similar ones. Behaviourism prioritises visible actions as the primary sign of learning (observable actions) instead of internal mental processes. Behaviour is acquired by connecting actions to outcomes, which can either strengthen or weaken those actions. Although behaviourism isn't as frequently used in teaching media literacy as other theories, there are still methods to use behaviourist principles in media literacy education. Behaviorism highlights the importance of reinforcement in moulding behaviour. When teaching media literacy, we can utilise positive feedback to motivate students to think critically about media content. To illustrate, educators or guardians can commend students for identifying and examining media content featuring stereotypes or false information. Behaviourism highlights the importance of using consequences to decrease undesired actions. These consequences can be applied to dissuade students from thoughtlessly consuming media content in teaching media literacy. To illustrate, guardians should

MIL, Society and Ethics restrict students' media access if they exhibit a deficiency in critical thinking while consuming media content. Behaviorism posits that learning behaviour occurs when individuals observe and imitate others. In media literacy education, students can acquire critical thinking abilities by watching and imitating those who exhibit these skills. Such role models may encompass educators, guardians, or fellow students who critically examine media content. Behaviourism proposes that when a stimulus is encountered repeatedly, it can lead to habituation, a situation where the reaction to the stimulus weakens with time. In media literacy education, students can be instructed to carefully examine media messages to prevent habituation. This enables them to uphold their capacity to identify and evaluate media messages featuring stereotypes or other concerning content. Behaviorism isn't the most widely used learning theory in media literacy education. However, certain aspects of behaviourism can be beneficial in fostering critical thinking abilities concerning media content. By employing positive encouragement, penalties, observational learning, and habituation, media literacy education can support students in becoming more knowledgeable and accountable media consumers.
6.9 CONSTRUCTIVISM LEARNING THEORY
Constructivism highlights how learners actively build knowledge and comprehension. The key aspects of the Constructivism learning theory include: Active Learning: Constructivism suggests that learning is a dynamic activity where individuals build their knowledge and comprehension by actively engaging with their surroundings and experiences. Social Interaction: Constructivism underscores the significance of social engagement and cooperation in learning. Learning is viewed as a social endeavour in which people collaborate to create meaning and understanding. Prior Knowledge: Constructivism recognises the significance of what one already knows and has encountered in the process of learning. Individuals use their existing knowledge and insights to form fresh understanding. Multiple Perspective: Constructivism suggests that various viewpoints and explanations for knowledge exist, and learners shape their comprehension according to their individual experiences and points of view. Problem-solving: Constructivism highlights the significance of solving problems and engaging in inquiry-based learning. Students are prompted to actively find answers to issues and pose inquiries to build their comprehension. Contextual Learning: Constructivism underscores the value of learning in a relevant context. When learning is connected to real-life experiences, students are more inclined to create meaningful knowledge and understanding. Learning involves creating mental frameworks using the learner's knowledge, past experiences, and interactions with others. Constructivism can find application in teaching media literacy through various methods: Active Learning: Constructivism highlights the significance of hands-on learning, where learners actively participate in forming their comprehension of the world. Media literacy

education entails motivating students to actively interact with media content, critically Learning Theories and MIL assess it, and develop their comprehension by drawing on their existing knowledge and experiences. Social Interaction: Constructivism underscores the value of social involvement in the learning journey. In media literacy education, this implies urging students to converse and exchange their interpretations of media content with others, participating in social interactions that enhance their grasp of the messages. Constructivism highlights the significance of creating mental models, which are inner depictions of a student's grasp of a specific concept or notion. In media literacy education, students are urged to construct mental representations of how media messages come together, encompassing the methods employed to convince or impact the viewers. Reflective Thinking: Constructivism highlights the significance of thoughtful reflection, in which students contemplate their learning journey and assess their comprehension. In media literacy education, this entails motivating students to ponder their grasp of media messages, appraise their analytical abilities, and pinpoint areas for enhancement. Media literacy education can enable students to become better informed and more discerning media message consumers by involving them in active, cooperative, and thoughtful learning encounters.
6.10 HUMANISM LEARNING THEORY
Humanism is a teaching approach centred on recognising and nurturing each student's distinct attributes and capabilities. The primary characteristics of the Humanism learning theory include: Humanism emphasises the learner as the focal point of the educational journey. It regards learning as a distinct and personal encounter that varies for every learner. Humanism highlights the significance of self-directed learning, promoting learners to take charge of their education and establish their objectives. Humanism underscores the significance of individual progress. Education is regarded as a means to foster personal development and enable learners to recognise their capabilities. Creating a favourable learning setting is crucial in Humanism. It underscores the significance of establishing a supportive, non-critical atmosphere that motivates students to venture into fresh ideas and embrace risks. Humanism highlights the value of experiential learning, where students are urged to gain knowledge through hands-on experiences and thoughtful contemplation. Humanism highlights the significance of holistic learning, urging learners to ponder the interrelationship between various knowledge domains. It views learning as a means to foster personal advancement and progress across all facets of one's life. In media literacy education, humanism can be employed in various ways: Personalisation: Humanism underscores the significance of tailoring the learning experience to individual learners, considering their needs and interests. In media literacy

MIL, Society and Ethics education, this entails encouraging students to investigate media content that relates to their own lives and passions and to analyse such content in a significant and pertinent manner. Humanism highlights the significance of self-guided learning, wherein the learner assumes accountability for their learning journey. In media literacy instruction, this implies motivating students to proactively engage in their learning by discovering and scrutinising media content that holds personal meaning and pertinence to their lives. Emphasising emotions: Humanism gives special attention to emotions regarding learning. It acknowledges that emotions can strongly influence motivation and learning. In media literacy education, students are urged to examine their emotional responses to media content and to thoughtfully assess the emotional tactics employed in media messages. Humanism highlights the significance of holistic growth, understanding that education should encompass academic knowledge and the nurturing of the entire individual. In media literacy education, this implies urging students to scrutinise media communications while considering their principles, convictions, and life encounters and ponder how media messages might affect their overall welfare. By involving students in personalised, self-guided, emotionally engaging media literacy instruction, with a strong emphasis on overall growth, we can assist them in becoming better-informed, discerning, and accountable users of media content.
6.11 CONNECTIVISM LEARNING THEORY
Connectivism highlights the significance of networks, links, and technological tools in learning. The key characteristics of the Connectivism theory include: Networked Learning: Learning happens via networks and connections rather than solely through individual experience or guidance. Technology: It grants learners access to information, resources, and networks. Distributed Cognition: Knowledge is spread among groups of people and technology rather than being confined only to one person's thoughts. Lifelong Learning: Continuous learning and adjusting to shifts in a fast-evolving world. Personal Learning Networks: Learners should actively create and sustain personal learning connections involving people and materials to aid their learning. Openness: It is the significance of being open in learning, which includes readily available information, resources, and connections, along with a willingness to exchange knowledge and thoughts with others. Connectivism is an educational theory highlighting the significance of links and networks in learning. It proposes that learning isn't solely an individual activity but a social one where knowledge is formed and exchanged through networks. Connectivism can be put into practice in various ways when teaching media literacy. Connectivism highlights the significance of networked learning, where students interact with each other and various learning materials through different platforms and situations. In media literacy education, this implies motivating students to interact with diverse

media outlets and scrutinise media messages, considering the interlinked structure of Learning Theories and MIL media networks. Connectivism emphasises the need to thoroughly assess sources, understanding that some sources are more dependable than others. In media education, this entails urging students to critically assess media origins, considering elements like prejudice, standpoint, and expertise while gauging the trustworthiness of information conveyed in media communications. Connectivism acknowledges that technology is a potent instrument for generating and disseminating knowledge through networks. In media literacy education, students are urged to use technology to interact with media content, produce their own content, and convey their insights and awareness of media messages to others. Connectivism underscores the significance of lifelong learning, acknowledging that learning is an ongoing journey that lasts a lifetime. Media literacy instruction implies motivating students to cultivate the abilities and mental approaches needed to persistently learn about media as they encounter fresh technologies and media channels over time. Connectivism offers a structure for teaching media literacy, focusing on networked learning, critically analysing sources, utilising technology, and continuous learning. When we involve students in media literacy education that considers the interconnectedness of media networks, the significance of critically assessing sources, and the role of technology in generating and disseminating knowledge, we can enable them to develop into better-informed, discerning, and accountable consumers and creators of media content. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How can the principles of humanism guide the creation of media literacy programs
that focus on learner's interests, needs, and experiences?

2. How can we apply the principles of social learning theory to foster collaborative
and participatory media literacy learning environments?

3. What are some examples of media literacy educational interventions that incorporate
multiple learning theories, and how effective are they?

6.12 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) In an academic setting, both teachers and students can form groups. Each group is tasked with producing short, 5-minute videos they create, possibly using a smartphone 115

MIL, Society and Ethics or computer software. These videos are then presented, followed by a structured discussion. Participants, whether educators or learners, are expected to respond to the following questions: What are the main components of the theory? What are its focus and strengths? How does it differ or relate to at least one theory? What are its weaknesses? Can educators or learners give at least one real-life example where they have seen this theory add value to their education or learning process? What might be missing from the theory or model? How do you think MIL can help? Are there any other theories of interest? Develop a lesson plan or outline for a curriculum unit that incorporates the strategies and activities mentioned in this Unit. Consider developing a stand-alone lesson/outline in MIL or a lesson/outline that integrates MIL into an existing course. Identify the key considerations/accommodations educators need for learners to demonstrate these skills successfully.
6.13 LET US SUM UP
Learning theories are structured models that aid in comprehending how individuals grasp information, whereas media literacy pertains to accessing, examining, assessing, and crafting media content. Investigating learning theories and media literacy holds significance as it enables us to formulate efficient approaches for fostering discerning thinking and responsible conduct when interacting with and generating media content. Several important theories about learning are useful in teaching media literacy. These theories include behaviourism, cognitive learning, constructivism, social learning, humanism, and connectivism. Each of these theories offers a unique view of how people learn and has significant implications for teaching media literacy. By using these theories in media literacy education, we can assist people in acquiring the abilities and information required to navigate the ever-changing world of media effectively.
6.14 KEYWORDS
Behaviourism : Behaviourism is a learning theory that emphasises the role of external stimuli and rewards in shaping behaviour. Cognitive : Cognitive learning theory emphasises the importance of mental learning theory processes in the learning process, including attention, perception, memory, and problem-solving. Constructivism : Constructivism is a learning theory that emphasises the importance of learners constructing their knowledge and understanding through active engagement with the material.

Social learning : Social learning theory emphasises the role of social interactions Learning Theories and MIL theory and modelling in the learning process. Humanism : Humanism is a learning theory that emphasises the unique qualities of individual learners, such as their emotions, experiences, and beliefs, and their capacity for self-directed learning. Connectivism : Connectivism is a learning theory that emphasises the importance of connections and networks in learning.
6.15 FURTHER READINGS
1. Barlow, R., & Janesick, V. J. (2007). Media literacy: A critical introduction.
Peter Lang.
2. De Abreu, B. S. (2020). Teaching media literacy: A critical and creative
approach. Routledge.
3. Fortner, R. S., & Fackler, P. M. (Eds.). (2017). The Handbook of Media
and Mass Communication Theory. Wiley Blackwell.
4. Salwen, M. B., & Pompper, D. (Eds.). (2018). Media literacy in the
information age: Current perspectives. Routledge.
5. Duffy, T. M., & Jonassen, D. H. (Eds.). (2013). Constructivism and the
technology of instruction: A conversation. Routledge.
6. Smith, D. F., & Cole, M. (Eds.). (1974). The social and cultural construction
of abilities. Sage Publications.
7. Jensen, E. (2005). Teaching with the brain in mind. Association for Supervision
and Curriculum Development.
8. Bijker, W. E., Hughes, T. P., & Pinch, T. J. (Eds.). (2012). The social
construction of technological systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology. MIT Press.
9. Bandura, A. (2011). The sage handbook of social learning theory. Sage
Publications.
10. Mayer, R. E. (Ed.). (2014). The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia
Learning. Cambridge University Press.
6.16 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Behaviorism underscores the significance of conditioning and rewards in
moulding behaviour. Implementing behaviourism in media literacy education involves using incentives and penalties to motivate students to participate in media analysis and production activities. To illustrate, offering praise or rewards for finishing media projects can strengthen desired behaviours, while offering criticism or withholding rewards can deter unwanted behaviours.

MIL, Society and Ethics 2. Cognitivism looks at how our minds work when we learn, like paying attention, understanding things, remembering, and solving problems. In media literacy teaching, you can use cognitivism by using methods that improve these mental processes, like using pictures, getting students involved, breaking information into smaller parts, and giving feedback and help to help students learn better.
3. Constructivism underscores the significance of learners actively building their
understanding by engaging with their surroundings. In contrast, connectivism underscores the value of interconnected learning and the capacity to retrieve and assess data in digital settings. These concepts can shape the planning and evaluation of media literacy educational efforts by highlighting the significance of learners' pre-existing knowledge, the necessity for social engagement and teamwork, and the importance of nurturing critical thinking abilities for appraising information from diverse origins. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Humanism underscores the significance of learners' interests, requirements,
and personal encounters in shaping their learning journeys. In media literacy education, humanism can guide the creation of educational plans that precede learners' interests and offer opportunities to contemplate their experiences, linking them to the analysis and production of media content. For instance, urging learners to craft media projects mirroring their encounters and viewpoints can foster a connection with the material and cultivate a feeling of ownership over their education.
2. Social learning theory highlights the value of social interaction and role modelling
in shaping behaviour. This theory can be applied in media literacy education by establishing cooperative and participatory learning settings that motivate learners to engage and glean insights from one another's experiences. For instance, group assignments or peer review procedures can prompt learners to share their ideas and perspectives, facilitating learning through feedback exchange.
3. Instances of media literacy educational strategies that incorporate multiple
learning theories encompass using multimedia elements to offer visual and auditory cues that bolster learners' concentration and memory, employing social media platforms to promote collaboration and interaction among learners, and implementing gamification tactics to furnish incentives and feedback that reinforce desirable conduct. The efficacy of these approaches may vary depending on the particular circumstances and the needs and interests of the learners.

Learning Theories and MIL
UNIT 7 ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR MIL
IN LEARNING SPACES
Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 Global Experiences of MIL Educational Intervention
7.3 Experiences of MIL Training in Europe
7.3.1 European Schoolnet
7.3.2 Media Literacy Network
7.3.3 Digital Competence Framework
7.3.4 National Media Literacy Programs of Europe
7.4 Tracing Experiences of MIL Education in North America
7.4.1 Media Literacy Experiments in Canada
7.4.2 Media Literacy Experiments in the USA
7.5 Asian Experiences of MIL Training
7.5.1 Media Literacy Experiments in Japan
7.5.2 Media Literacy Experiments in South Korea
7.5.3 Media Literacy Experiments in Singapore
7.5.4 Media Literacy Experiments in China
7.5.5 Media Literacy Experiments in India
7.6 Global Conventions for MIL Training
7.6.1 Grunwald Declaration on Media Education
7.6.2 Prague Declaration "Towards an Information Literate Society"
7.6.3 Alexandria Proclamation on Information Literacy and Lifelong Learning
7.6.4 Fez Declaration on Media and Information Literacy
7.6.5 Paris Declaration on Media and Information Literacy in the Digital Era
7.6.6 Moscow Declaration on Media and Information Literacy
7.6.7 Belgrade Declaration of UNESCO on Media and Information Literacy
7.7 Let Us Sum Up
7.8 Further Readings
7.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
Media literacy training aims to teach children, students, and young people how to access accurate information, critically analyse and evaluate media messages, and participate responsibly in society-wide communication processes. By doing so, they can become informed and active consumers or producers of media content. The importance of media literacy training has increased worldwide due to the proliferation of media platforms and the rise of disinformation and fake news. With the democratisation of access to media and information through technology, participation in media has become more accessible to the general public. 119

MIL, Society and Ethics This unit will explore media literacy educational interventions from various global contexts, including Europe, North America, and Asia. We will analyse these interventions' goals, methods, and outcomes and evaluate their effectiveness. We will examine case studies and examples from various regions to comprehensively understand media literacy education. We will assess the impact of these interventions and compare their outcomes to identify the most successful strategies. We will discuss the importance of adapting media literacy education to local contexts, including cultural, social, and political factors. We will examine the contributions of government agencies, educational institutions, civil society organisations, and media outlets. We will explore practical strategies for implementing media literacy education daily. You will deeply understand media literacy education from a global perspective. You will be able to apply the principles of media literacy education to your context and develop strategies for promoting media literacy in your community. Throughout this unit, we will explore educational interventions from various global contexts, focusing on Europe, North America, and Asia. In addition to examining these experiences, we will also delve into the ongoing efforts to standardise media literacy training interventions in education.
7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading the unit, you will be able to: to identify and analyse media literacy educational interventions from different global contexts, including Europe, North America, and Asia; to evaluate the effectiveness of different media literacy educational interventions based on their goals, methods, and outcomes; to identify the challenges and opportunities in designing and implementing media literacy educational interventions in different global contexts. They will be able to understand the importance of adapting media literacy educational interventions to local contexts, including cultural, social, and political factors; to recognise the role of different stakeholders, including government agencies, educational institutions, civil society organisations, and media outlets, in designing, implementing, and evaluating media literacy educational interventions; and to apply the principles of media literacy education to their contexts, including their own media consumption and production practices.
7.2 GLOBAL EXPERIENCES OF MIL EDUCATIONAL
INTERVENTION
Media literacy educational intervention has become a critical issue worldwide in recent years. The rise of disinformation and fake news, as well as the proliferation of media platforms, has made it increasingly important for individuals to access accurate information, critically analyse and evaluate media messages, and participate responsibly in society-wide communication processes. Various organisations, educational institutions, and media outlets have implemented media literacy training programs to address this

issue. These programs aim to educate individuals on how media messages are Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
constructed, how they can influence public opinion, and how to identify and evaluate bias and propaganda. In Europe, media literacy education has been a key component of the European Union's media policy since 2007. The EU's Media Literacy Strategy aims to promote media literacy as a lifelong learning skill and to support the development of high-quality media literacy initiatives across the EU. Many European countries have developed media literacy initiatives, including the UK's Media Smart program, which provides primary schools with free teaching materials and resources. In North America, media literacy education has been integrated into school curricula in many states and provinces. For example, the Ontario Ministry of Education has included media literacy as a key component of its Language curriculum, and the US National Association for Media Literacy Education has developed standards for media literacy education in K-12 schools. Media literacy organisations such as the Media Education Lab at the University of Rhode Island and the Center for Media Literacy in California have developed media literacy resources and professional development opportunities for teachers. Media literacy education is gaining importance in Asia, especially in countries like Japan, South Korea, and China. In Japan, media literacy education has been integrated into the country's national curriculum since 2013, and the government has launched various media literacy initiatives, including establishing a media literacy promotion council. In South Korea, media literacy education is included in the country's national middle and high school curriculum. In China, media literacy education is part of the country's media regulations and has been included in its national curriculum standards. Now, let us trace the experiences of media and information literacy education interventions from specific regional/country perspectives. These are just a few examples of media literacy experiments across the world. These initiatives aim to equip people with the skills to critically evaluate media messages and make informed decisions in an increasingly complex and ever-changing media environment.
7.3 EXPERIENCES OF MIL TRAINING IN EUROPE
In Europe, media literacy programs are often integrated into formal education systems, focusing on digital competencies and critical thinking skills. The European Schoolnet runs several initiatives to promote media literacy. In Europe, media literacy experiments promote media literacy skills and critical thinking among the general public, especially with the rise of digital and online media. These initiatives aim to empower European citizens to make informed decisions about the media they consume and to participate responsibly and critically in a digital and interconnected world.
7.3.1 European Schoolnet
European Schoolnet (EUN) is a network of European Ministries of Education, established in 1997 to support the development of e-learning in schools across Europe. The organisation is headquartered in Brussels, Belgium, and it promotes innovation and best practices in education, focusing on the use of digital technologies in the classroom. 121

Figure 1: Media literacy for education (Source: http://www.eun.org/) One of the key areas of focus for European Schoolnet is media literacy. The organisation runs several initiatives to promote media literacy among students and teachers, including the "Media and Information Literacy for Teachers" program. This program provides training and resources to educators to help them integrate media literacy education into their teaching and to support students in developing critical thinking and digital competencies. European Schoolnet also provides a platform for collaboration and exchanging ideas and best practices between educators and policymakers. The organisation works closely with other stakeholders, including industry and academia, to develop and promote innovative approaches to media literacy education.
7.3.2 Media Literacy Network
The Media Literacy Network (MLN) of Europe is a network of organisations and experts working to promote media literacy across the continent. The network was established to provide a platform for collaboration and exchanging ideas and best practices between media literacy practitioners and researchers. The MLN promotes media literacy education and advocacy in Europe, empowering people to critically evaluate media messages and make informed decisions in an increasingly complex and rapidly changing media landscape. The network works closely with other stakeholders, including governments, media organisations, and industry, to promote media literacy and digital competencies. The MLN provides various resources and support to media literacy practitioners, including training, research and development, and policy advocacy. The network collaborates with other media literacy organisations, including the European Schoolnet, to promote integrating media literacy education into formal and informal learning environments.
7.3.3 Digital Competence Framework
The Digital Competence Framework (DCF) was developed by the European Commission to outline the skills and competencies required for digital citizenship and

media literacy in Europe. The DCF guides educators and policymakers to help equip Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
citizens with the skills they need to participate in a digital society. Figure 2: The Digital competency framework (Source: https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC128415) The DCF comprises five core competencies: information and data literacy, communication and collaboration, digital content creation, safety and security, and problem-solving and decision-making. These competencies are further broken down into specific skills and knowledge areas that individuals need to master to be considered digitally competent. The DCF is designed to be flexible and adaptable, and it can be adapted and customised to meet the needs of different countries, regions, and communities. The framework is based on the idea that digital competencies are essential for full participation in the digital society and that everyone, regardless of age, background, or location, should be able to develop these skills.
7.3.4 National Media Literacy Programs of Europe
Many European countries have established national media literacy programs to promote the development of critical thinking and digital competencies among their citizens. These programs vary in scope and focus, but they all aim to empower people to critically evaluate media messages and make informed decisions in an increasingly complex and rapidly changing media landscape. For example, in the United Kingdom, the government has established a national media literacy strategy to promote the development of media literacy skills and competencies among young people. The strategy includes a range of initiatives, including teacher training programs and media literacy education resources for schools. In France, the national media literacy program promotes media literacy and digital competencies among young people, focusing on integrating media literacy education into the formal education system. The program includes teacher training programs, student workshops, and the developing of media literacy resources and tools. Similarly, in Germany, the national media literacy program promotes media literacy skills and competencies among young people, developing critical thinking and digital competencies. The program includes teacher training programs, student workshops, and the developing of media literacy resources and tools. 123

MIL, Society and Ethics In each of these countries, the national media literacy programs are designed to promote the development of media literacy skills and competencies among citizens, focusing on empowering them to participate in the digital society responsibly and critically. The government and other stakeholders support the programs, and they are seen as an important tool for promoting digital citizenship and media literacy across Europe. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the purpose of media literacy educational interventions?

2. Why has the importance of media literacy training increased worldwide?

3. What are some challenges and opportunities in designing and implementing media
literacy educational interventions?

4. Why is it important to adapt media literacy educational interventions to local
contexts?

7.4 TRACING EXPERIENCES OF MIL EDUCATION
IN NORTH AMERICA
7.4.1 Media Literacy Experiments in Canada
Canada has a strong tradition of promoting media literacy and digital competencies among its citizens. Several initiatives and programs are aimed at promoting media literacy and digital competencies across the country. For example, the Canadian government has established a national media literacy strategy to promote the development of critical thinking and digital competencies among young people. The strategy includes a range of initiatives, including teacher training programs and media literacy education resources for schools. Another important initiative is the Canadian Centre for Digital and Media Literacy (CCDML), a national organisation that promotes media literacy and digital competencies across Canada. The CCDML provides various resources and support to media literacy practitioners and educators, including training, research, and policy advocacy.

In addition, there are several media literacy organisations and initiatives in Canada that Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
are focused on promoting media literacy and digital competencies, including MediaSmarts, which is a Canadian non-profit organisation dedicated to promoting media literacy among young people, and the Media Awareness Network, which is a national organisation dedicated to promoting media literacy education in Canada.
National Media Literacy Strategy Of Canada
The National Media Literacy Strategy of Canada is an initiative established by the Canadian government to promote the development of critical thinking and digital competencies among its citizens. The strategy is designed to help equip citizens with the skills they need to participate in the digital society responsibly and critically, and it includes a range of initiatives aimed at promoting media literacy and digital competencies across the country. The strategy includes initiatives such as teacher training programs, media literacy education resources for schools and research and policy advocacy to promote media literacy. The government works with various stakeholders, including media literacy organisations, educators, and industry partners, to implement the strategy and achieve its goals.
Canadian Centre for Digital and Media Literacy
The Canadian Centre for Digital and Media Literacy (CCDML) is a national organisation promoting media literacy and digital competencies across Canada. It is a non-profit organisation that works with various stakeholders, including government agencies, educators, industry partners, and media literacy organisations, to promote media literacy and digital competencies in Canada. The CCDML provides various resources and support to media literacy practitioners and educators, including training, research, and policy advocacy. The CCDML also researches media literacy and its impact on individuals, communities, and society. The organisation's research focuses on digital citizenship, media consumption habits, and the effectiveness of media literacy education. The findings of this research are used to inform the development of new media literacy resources and programs. Another important activity of the CCDML is advocacy. The organisation advocates for policies and practices that support digital and media literacy education in Canada. This includes advocating for media literacy to be integrated into school curricula and working to ensure that media literacy education is accessible to individuals from diverse backgrounds.
7.4.2 Media Literacy Experiments In the USA
The United States has a long history of promoting media literacy and digital competencies, and several initiatives and programs are aimed at promoting these skills and competencies across the country. For example, the National Association for Media Literacy Education (NAMLE) is a non-profit organisation promoting media literacy education in the United States. NAMLE provides various resources and support to media literacy practitioners and educators, including professional development opportunities, research and policy advocacy, and school media literacy education resources. Another important initiative is the Digital Promise League of Innovative Schools, a network of K-12 schools in the United States working to promote digital competencies

MIL, Society and Ethics and media literacy among their students. The League provides its member schools professional development opportunities, resources, and tools to support integrating digital competencies and media literacy into their curricula. In addition, there are several media literacy organisations and initiatives in the United States that are focused on promoting media literacy and digital competencies, including the Media Literacy Project, which is a non-profit organisation dedicated to promoting media literacy education and advocacy, and Common Sense Media, which is a national organisation dedicated to promoting safe and responsible media and technology use by children and families.
7.5 ASIAN EXPERIENCES OF MIL TRAINING
Various organisations and educational institutions have implemented media literacy experiments in Asia to promote critical thinking, responsible use of media, and digital citizenship. Here are some examples of media literacy experiments in different countries across Asia.
7.5.1 Media Literacy Experiments In Japan
Media literacy has been a topic of growing importance in Japan in recent years. The government has recognised the need to promote media literacy education to help citizens better navigate the increasingly complex media landscape. In 2020, the government announced a new plan to strengthen media literacy education in schools to enhance citizens' ability to critically evaluate information and understand the implications of media in society. Media literacy education in Japan has been primarily focused on schools, with the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) leading efforts to promote it in the curriculum. In 2018, MEXT revised the curriculum guidelines for elementary, middle, and high schools to include media literacy as a key component of the education system. Several initiatives by non-governmental organisations and academic institutions also aim to promote media literacy in Japan. For example, the Japan Association for Media and Communication Studies (JAMCS) holds an annual conference on media literacy, which brings together academics, media professionals, and policymakers to discuss the latest research and developments in the field. In addition, the Japanese government has partnered with UNESCO to promote media and information literacy (MIL) in the Asia-Pacific region. Japan has hosted several MIL-related events, which brought together policymakers, educators, and media professionals to discuss the role of MIL in building sustainable and inclusive cities. Despite these efforts, media literacy education in Japan still faces challenges. One of the biggest obstacles is the lack of teacher training in media literacy. Many teachers feel ill-equipped to teach media literacy and may lack the resources or support to do so effectively. In addition, there is a need to address the digital divide in Japan, which can limit access to information and exacerbate existing inequalities.
7.5.2 Media Literacy Experiments In South Korea
South Korea has actively promoted media literacy among its citizens, especially young

people. The government has implemented various policies and programs to improve Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
the media literacy of the population. One significant initiative is the Media Literacy Education Certification Program for Teachers, launched in 2012. This program trains teachers to incorporate media literacy education into their teaching, helping students learn how to analyse and evaluate media content critically. The program also includes online courses, workshops, and conferences to keep educators updated with the latest developments in media literacy. Another program that has been implemented is the Smart Media Education Program. This program aims to promote media literacy among children and teenagers by providing tools to help them navigate and critically analyse digital media content. The program also provides training for parents and teachers to help them teach children how to use digital media safely and responsibly. The Korean government has also invested in developing a media literacy curriculum and resources. The Ministry of Education has developed a media literacy curriculum for primary and secondary schools, including media ethics, copyright laws, and online privacy. The curriculum is designed to teach students how to access, analyse, and create media content effectively. The government has also created media literacy campaigns with media organisations and NGOs. For example 2016, the Korea Communications Commission launched the "Digital Citizenship Campaign" to promote safe and responsible internet use among young people. The campaign included public service announcements, educational materials, and workshops for parents and teachers.
7.5.3 Media Literacy Experiments In Singapore
Singapore has been actively promoting media literacy through various initiatives and programs in recent years. The Media Literacy Council (MLC) was established in 2012 as a collaborative platform between the government, industry, and community to champion media literacy in Singapore. One of the main initiatives by the MLC is the Better Internet Campaign, which aims to promote responsible online behaviour and digital citizenship. The campaign includes educational resources and workshops for students, parents, and educators. The MLC also partners with schools and organisations to conduct media literacy workshops and seminars. In addition, the MLC launched the "Be Internet Citizens" program in partnership with Google, aimed at teaching teenagers how to be responsible and safe online. The program covers online hate speech, misinformation, and privacy. Another notable initiative is the Media Literacy Council's annual "Better Internet" conference, which brings together experts, policymakers, and stakeholders to discuss the latest trends and challenges in the digital landscape. The conference provides a platform for sharing best practices and exchanging ideas on how to promote media literacy in Singapore. The government has also implemented policies to promote media literacy. For example, the Ministry of Education has introduced media literacy as part of the national curriculum for primary and secondary schools. Students learn about critical thinking, digital citizenship, and online safety. Moreover, various organisations and non-governmental entities have also launched media literacy initiatives. For example, the Media Literacy

MIL, Society and Ethics Council partners with the National Library Board to conduct media literacy workshops and talks for the general public.
7.5.4 Media Literacy Experiments In China
China has recently tried to promote media literacy, especially as digital media and technology rapidly develop and shape society. The Chinese government has implemented several initiatives to educate the public on media literacy and encourage responsible media consumption. One of the primary initiatives is including media literacy education in the national curriculum for primary and secondary schools. The Ministry of Education introduced media literacy in the national curriculum in 2018. The curriculum includes media ethics, digital citizenship, and critical thinking. The goal is to equip students with the necessary skills to navigate the media landscape responsibly and informally. Additionally, the government has launched several campaigns and initiatives to promote media literacy among the general public. For example, the China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC) launched the "Media Literacy in China" campaign in
2019. The campaign aims to educate Chinese citizens on identifying fake news,
misinformation, and propaganda in online media. Furthermore, various media literacy training programs have been implemented in China. For instance, the China Media Academy offers courses on media literacy to media professionals, journalists, and educators. The courses cover media ethics, media laws, and media regulation. Moreover, various organisations and non-governmental entities have also launched media literacy initiatives. For example, the China Association for Science and Technology (CAST) launched the "Science Communication for All" program, which includes media literacy training for students and the general public.
7.5.5 Media Literacy Experiments In India
Media literacy training in India has gained significant attention in recent years due to the rapid expansion of media platforms and increasing concerns over disinformation and fake news. The government of India has taken initiatives to promote media literacy in the country. In 2019, the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) issued guidelines for media literacy education in schools. The guidelines suggest integrating media literacy concepts and skills into the existing curriculum, providing teacher training in media literacy, and creating a safe and inclusive learning environment for students. Several non-governmental organisations (NGOs) have also taken the initiative to promote media literacy in India. For example, the Internet and Mobile Association of India (IAMAI) launched the 'Digital Literacy for Women' campaign to educate women on digital and media literacy skills, particularly in rural areas. The Center for Media Literacy and Digital Citizenship (CMLDC) has also developed media literacy modules for students and teachers, providing them with resources and tools to critically evaluate media content. There are also media literacy initiatives at the state level. For example, the state government of Maharashtra has launched a program called 'Media Literacy and Ethics

in Schools' to provide media literacy training to students, teachers, and parents. The Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
program aims to equip participants with the skills to evaluate media content and understand its impact on society. Despite the efforts made by the government and NGOs, there are still challenges in promoting media literacy in India. The country's vast population has diverse cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic backgrounds, making it challenging to develop a comprehensive media literacy program catering to all groups. Furthermore, there is a lack of awareness among the general public about media literacy, and more efforts are needed to raise awareness and promote media literacy education at all levels.
7.6 GLOBAL CONVENTIONS FOR MIL TRAINING
Media literacy education has gained increasing attention recently as the media landscape has rapidly evolved with new technologies and platforms. As a result, various global conventions and standards have been developed to promote media literacy education and ensure its integration into educational policies and curricula. These conventions and standards aim to address the challenges of the fast-paced media environment and help individuals develop the skills and knowledge necessary to critically analyse and evaluate media content, communicate effectively, and engage in informed civic participation. They provide a framework for governments, educational institutions, media professionals, and civil society organisations to work together towards promoting media literacy education. Some of the key conventions and standards on media literacy education include the Grunwald Declaration on Media Education, the Prague Declaration "Towards an Information Literate Society", the Alexandria Proclamation on Information Literacy and Lifelong Learning, the Fez Declaration on Media and Information Literacy, the Paris Declaration on Media and Information Literacy in the Digital Era, the Moscow Declaration on Media and Information Literacy, and the Belgrade Declaration of UNESCO on Media and Information Literacy. These documents outline the importance of media literacy education and guidance on how it can be integrated into education policies, curricula, and programs.
7.6.1 Grunwald Declaration on Media Education
The Grunwald Declaration on Media Education is a statement that outlines the importance of media education for individuals and society. It emphasises the importance of media education for empowering individuals and building inclusive and informed societies. It was adopted in Grunwald, Germany, in 1982 and is considered an important landmark in media education. The declaration outlines the principles and recommendations for promoting media education, recognising its role in fostering critical thinking and media literacy skills among individuals. It highlights the importance of media education in creating informed and responsible citizens, promoting inclusiveness and diversity, and countering disinformation and media manipulation. The Grunwald Declaration calls for integrating media education into formal and non- formal education systems and encourages interdisciplinary and inter-sectoral collaboration in promoting media education. It also stresses the importance of

MIL, Society and Ethics researching, evaluating, and disseminating best practices in media education. It recognises media education as a human right and an important element of democratic societies. The points outlined in this policy document emphasise the need to initiate and support comprehensive media education programs at all levels of education, including adult education. The focus should be on developing critical awareness and competence among media users through analysing media products, using media as a means of creative expression, and effectively using media channels. Training courses for teachers and intermediaries should also be developed to increase their knowledge and understanding of the media and appropriate teaching methods. There is also a need to stimulate research and development activities for media education and support actions undertaken by UNESCO for international cooperation in media education.
7.6.2 Prague Declaration "Towards an Information Literate
Society" The Prague Declaration "Towards an Information Literate Society" is a document that was adopted by the European Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (EFLA) in 2003. The declaration emphasises the importance of information literacy as a key competence for full participation in a democratic society and individual and social development. It calls for developing information literacy skills and competencies through education and lifelong learning opportunities and promoting information literacy in all sectors of society, including education, business, and government. The policy document highlights the importance of creating an Information Society for social, cultural, and economic development in the 21st century and beyond. Information literacy is crucial for effectively participating in the Information Society, and it encompasses identifying, locating, evaluating, organising, creating, using, and communicating information to address issues or problems. Information literacy, access to essential information and effective use of ICT can reduce inequities and promote tolerance and mutual understanding. Governments should develop interdisciplinary programs tailored to specific needs and contexts to promote information literacy nationwide. Information Literacy should be integral to Education for All, contributing to achieving the United Nations Millennium Development Goals and respecting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
7.6.3 Alexandria Proclamation on Information Literacy and
Lifelong Learning
The Alexandria Proclamation on Information Literacy and Lifelong Learning is a statement that was adopted by the UNESCO General Conference in 2005. The Proclamation recognises the importance of information literacy as a key component of lifelong learning in the digital age. It highlights the need for individuals to develop the skills and competencies necessary to access, evaluate, use, and create information effectively and responsibly in all aspects of their lives. The Alexandria Proclamation emphasises the role of information literacy in empowering individuals and communities to participate fully in the information society and to make informed decisions about their lives. It also acknowledges the importance of partnerships between educators, the government, and other stakeholders in promoting information literacy and lifelong learning.

The Proclamation calls for integrating information literacy into formal and non-formal Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
education systems and developing national and international initiatives to promote information literacy. It also stresses the importance of ongoing professional development for educators to ensure they have the skills and knowledge necessary to teach information literacy effectively. The declaration describes various strategies for promoting information literacy and lifelong learning. These strategies include regional and thematic meetings to adopt these principles, professional development for personnel in various sectors, the inclusion of information literacy in education and government policy-making, programs to enhance the employability and entrepreneurial capabilities of disadvantaged groups, and recognition of lifelong learning and information literacy as essential elements for accrediting all education and training programs.
7.6.4 Fez Declaration on Media and Information Literacy
The Fez Declaration on Media and Information Literacy (MIL) is a statement that was adopted by the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) in 2005. The Fez Declaration recognises the critical role of MIL in empowering individuals and communities to participate fully in the information society and to make informed decisions about their lives. The Fez Declaration highlights the need for individuals to develop the skills and competencies necessary to access, evaluate, use, and create information effectively and responsibly. It also recognises the importance of MIL in promoting freedom of expression, cultural diversity, and social cohesion. The Declaration calls for integrating MIL into formal and non-formal education systems and developing national and international initiatives to promote MIL. It also stresses the importance of ongoing professional development for educators to ensure they have the skills and knowledge necessary to effectively teach MIL. The International Forum on Media and Information Literacy (MIL) reaffirmed its commitment to MIL for All and proposed initiatives to promote MIL worldwide. The forum stressed the need to integrate MIL into educational curricula, both formal and non-formal, to promote critical thinking and analysis skills in learners and teachers. The production and distribution of user-generated content (UGC), particularly youth- produced media, was also included as part of MIL. The forum also advocated conducting research on the state of MIL in different countries and expanding the UNESCO- UNITWIN-UNAoC-MILID network to include other universities worldwide. Additionally, they proposed setting up national, regional, and international institutes or centres on Media and Information Literacy. The forum emphasised MIL's importance for intercultural dialogue, mutual knowledge, understanding, and ethical values in communication, information, and media. They endorsed the setting up a regional MIL Institute or Centre to enhance its international relevance.
7.6.5 Paris Declaration on Media and Information Literacy in
the Digital Era
The Paris Declaration on Media and Information Literacy in the Digital Era is a document that was adopted by the UNESCO Member States in 2014. It highlights the importance of media and information literacy (MIL) as a fundamental right and a key competence in the digital era. The declaration recognises MIL as a means of empowering individuals to engage in informed dialogue and make informed decisions and promoting social

MIL, Society and Ethics inclusion, active citizenship, and cultural diversity. It calls on Member States to take concrete steps to promote MIL and to integrate it into education systems and lifelong learning opportunities. The Paris Declaration on Media and Information Literacy in the Digital Era provides several key recommendations for promoting MIL. One of these recommendations is the integration of MIL into formal and non-formal education systems, including developing lifelong learning opportunities in MIL. The declaration also calls for cross-sectoral cooperation to promote MIL, including partnerships between the education, culture, media, and technology sectors. In addition, the declaration emphasises the importance of international cooperation in developing and disseminating MIL initiatives and best practices. The availability of diverse and reliable information sources is another recommendation by the Paris Declaration. It calls for promoting a diverse and pluralistic media landscape that provides reliable, accurate, balanced information access. Developing MIL competencies and skills, including critical thinking, creativity, digital, and data literacy, is also highlighted as a key recommendation. The declaration also calls for the promotion of MIL among marginalised and vulnerable groups, including women, children, rural communities, and persons with disabilities. These recommendations aim to empower individuals with the skills and knowledge needed to navigate and critically engage with the media and information landscape in the digital era.
7.6.6 Moscow Declaration on Media and Information Literacy
The Moscow Declaration on Media and Information Literacy (MIL) is a statement that outlines the importance of MIL in promoting informed and responsible citizens, fostering critical thinking, and building inclusive and informed societies. The declaration was adopted in Moscow, Russia, in 2012 and is considered an important landmark in MIL. The declaration calls for recognition of the importance of Media and Information Literacy (MIL) to the well-being and progress of individuals, communities, economies, and civil society. It encourages integrating MIL promotion into national policies and outlines the need for collaboration between stakeholders, including government, educational and media organisations, libraries, archives, museums, and NGOs. Structural and pedagogical reforms are suggested to enhance MIL, and it is recommended that MIL be integrated into the curricula at all levels of education. Support for networks and organisations working on MIL issues is prioritised, with investments in capacity building. The declaration calls for research on and developing tools for MIL, including frameworks for understanding, evidence-based practices, indicators, assessment techniques, and implementing MIL standards. MIL-related competencies that support reading, writing, speaking, listening, and viewing are encouraged, along with intercultural dialogue and international cooperation. The statement emphasises investment in processes that support the long-term preservation of digital information and the promotion and protection of rights to freedom of expression, freedom of information, right to privacy and confidentiality, ethical principles, and other rights.
7.6.7 Belgrade Declaration of UNESCO on Media and
Information Literacy
The Belgrade Declaration on Media and Information Literacy is a document that UNESCO adopted in October 2019. It builds on the Paris Declaration on Media and

Information Literacy in the Digital Era. It highlights the importance of media and Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
information literacy (MIL) in the rapidly evolving media and information landscape. The declaration emphasises the need for MIL as a means of promoting democratic participation, cultural diversity, and human rights, as well as a means of fostering media literacy and digital citizenship. The Belgrade Declaration sets out several key recommendations to promote media and information literacy (MIL) in today's rapidly changing world. Firstly, the declaration calls for integrating MIL into national education curricula, ensuring that individuals have access to the skills and competencies necessary to critically evaluate, understand, and use media and information in their daily lives. The development of lifelong learning opportunities in MIL is also encouraged. The declaration stresses the importance of cooperation between sectors, including education, media, and technology, to promote MIL. This cross-sectoral approach recognises the complex and interconnected nature of today's media and information landscape. The declaration also emphasises the need for MIL in the context of new technologies, such as artificial intelligence, and calls for developing relevant MIL competencies and skills. The declaration discusses various approaches to implementing a media and information literacy (MIL) curriculum. One approach is a stand-alone course that is mandatory for all learners and teachers, while another involves intensive face-to-face training followed by a project assignment. The article also suggests integrating MIL components into related courses or offering the curriculum online as a certificate, diploma, or degree programme. In-house MIL training courses can also be developed for all professionals, and the curriculum can be offered through community engagement and outreach. UNESCO member states should consider gender equality in the content, learning outcomes, and evaluation of the MIL curriculum. Additionally, cultural communication barriers should be evaluated in the areas targeted for integration. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Identify two media literacy educational interventions from different global contexts
and describe their goals and methods.

2. Evaluate the effectiveness of a media literacy educational intervention you are
familiar with based on its goals, methods, and outcomes.

3. Identify two challenges and two opportunities in designing and implementing media
literacy educational interventions in different global contexts.

133

MIL, Society and Ethics 4. Recognise the role of two different stakeholders in designing, implementing, and evaluating media literacy educational interventions.

5. Apply the principles of media literacy education to your context, including your
own media consumption and production practices.

7.7 LET US SUM UP
This unit focused on media literacy training and its increasing importance in today's world. The proliferation of media platforms and the rise of disinformation and fake news have made it necessary to educate individuals on how to access accurate information, critically analyse and evaluate media messages, and participate responsibly in society-wide communication processes. The unit also explored media literacy educational interventions from different global contexts, including Europe, North America, and Asia. It analysed these interventions' goals, methods, and outcomes and evaluated their effectiveness. The unit examined case studies and examples from various regions to comprehensively understand media literacy education. It assessed the impact of these interventions and compared their outcomes to identify the most successful strategies. The unit highlighted the importance of adapting media literacy education to local contexts, including cultural, social, and political factors. It examined the contributions of government agencies, educational institutions, civil society organisations, and media outlets. You might have developed a deep understanding of media literacy education from a global perspective and will be able to apply the principles of media literacy education to your context. The unit also explored practical strategies for implementing media literacy education daily. Throughout the unit, there was a focus on ongoing efforts to standardise media literacy training interventions in education.
7.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Alper, M., & Murthy, D. (2019). Critical media literacy for social justice: A
pedagogical framework for online and offline praxis. Learning, Media and Technology, 44(1), 1-15.2. Hobbs, R. (2010). Digital and media literacy: A plan of action. The Aspen Institute.
3. Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushotma, R., Robison, A. J., & Weigel, M. (2009).
Confronting the challenges of participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century. MIT Press.
4. Livingstone, S. (2004). Media literacy and the challenge of new information and
communication technologies. The Communication Review, 7(1), 3-14.5. Livingstone, S. (2011). Media literacy and the mediation of communication
134 competencies. International Journal of Communication, 5, 22.6. Martinez, M. A., & Torres-Toukoumidis, A. (2017). Media and information Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
literacy policies in the EU: A cross-country comparison. Comunicar, 25(53), 47-56.7. UNESCO. (2011). Media and information literacy: Curriculum for teachers.
UNESCO.
8. UNESCO. (2013). MIL Curriculum for Knowledge Societies: A Framework of
Competencies for Citizens in the Digital Age. UNESCO.
9. UNESCO. (2014). Media and Information Literacy Policy and Strategy
Guidelines. UNESCO.
10. UNESCO. (2016). Global media and information literacy assessment framework:
Country readiness and competencies. UNESCO.
11. UNESCO. (2017). Media and Information Literacy Policy for all: A White Paper.
UNESCO.
12. UNESCO. (2018). MIL Cities: Empowering Local Communities Through Media
and Information Literacy. UNESCO.
13. UNESCO. (2018). Guidelines for Developing National MIL Policies and
Strategies. UNESCO.
14. UNESCO. (2019). Media and information literacy in the digital age: Teaching and
learning in higher education. UNESCO.
15. UNESCO. (2020). Global report on implementing media and information literacy
(MIL) in education: Country perspectives. UNESCO.
16. UNESCO. (2020). Media and Information Literacy in Journalism: Selected Issues
and Case Studies. UNESCO.
17. UNESCO. (2013). Media and information literacy for knowledge societies. http:/
/unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002185/218509E.pdf
18. UNESCO. (2014). Media and information literacy policy and strategy guidelines.
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002246/224649E.pdf
19. UNESCO. (2016). Global media and information literacy assessment framework.
https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/gmil_framework_en.pdf
20. UNESCO. (2017). Media and information literacy in journalism curriculum and
training. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0025/002573/257345E.pdf
21. UNESCO. (2018). MIL as a means to foster social inclusion and intercultural
dialogue. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002615/261581E.pdf
22. UNESCO. (2019). Media and information literacy: Curriculum for teachers. https:/
/en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/mil_curriculum_for_teachers_2019.pdf
23. UNESCO. (2020). Advancing media and information literacy education in Africa:
Policy guidelines. https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/advancing mil_education_in_africa.pdf

7.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Media literacy educational interventions teach individuals how to access
accurate information, critically analyse and evaluate media messages, and participate responsibly in society-wide communication processes.
2. The importance of media literacy training has increased worldwide due to the
proliferation of media platforms and the rise of disinformation and fake news.
3. Some challenges in designing and implementing media literacy educational
interventions include adapting to local contexts, including cultural, social, and political factors. Opportunities include engaging stakeholders, including government agencies, educational institutions, civil society organisations, and media outlets.
4. Adapting media literacy educational interventions to local contexts is important
to address cultural, social, and political factors that may impact the effectiveness of the intervention. Check Your Progress: 2
1. One example of a media literacy educational intervention is the "Media Smarts"
program in Canada, which aims to promote critical thinking skills in media consumption among children and youth. The program provides educational resources for teachers and parents and interactive online games and activities for students. Another example is the "Media and Information Literacy for Development and Civic Engagement" program in the Philippines, which aims to enhance citizens' understanding and use of media for democratic participation and community development. The program includes training for educators, community leaders, media professionals, and community-based media production projects.
2. The "NewsWise" program in the United Kingdom is a media literacy
educational intervention that aims to teach children critical thinking and news literacy skills. The program includes in-classroom resources for teachers and interactive online games and student activities. According to a study conducted by the BBC, students who participated in the program demonstrated a better understanding of news sources and were likelier to check multiple sources before trusting a news story. However, the study also found that the program did not significantly improve students' ability to identify fake news.
3. One challenge in designing and implementing media literacy educational
interventions is adapting the content to local cultural, social, and political contexts. Another challenge is ensuring access to resources and technology in communities with limited resources. The growing use of social media and technology as tools for education and engagement is an opportunity to design media literacy educational interventions. Another opportunity is the potential for stakeholder collaboration, including government agencies, educational institutions, civil society organisations, and media outlets.

4. Government agencies can play a role in designing and implementing media Enabling Environment for
MIL in Learning Spaces
literacy educational interventions by providing funding and policy support. Educational institutions can provide training for educators and students and integrate media literacy into existing curricula. Both government agencies and educational institutions can participate in evaluating the effectiveness of media literacy educational interventions.
5. To apply the principles of media literacy education to my context, I can critically
evaluate the sources of news and information that I consume and fact-check any claims before sharing them with others. I can also engage in online discussions to share perspectives and challenge misinformation. As a media content producer, I can ensure that I am creating accurate, balanced content based on reliable sources. I can also consider the potential impact of my content on others and be mindful of the messages I am conveying.

UNIT 8 AUDIENCE: NATIONAL AND
GLOBAL CONTEXTS
Structure
8.0 Introduction
8.1 Learning Outcomes
8.2 History of the Term 'Audience.'
8.3 Understanding 'Audiences'
8.3.1 Public-Crowd-Group-Mass-Audience
8.3.2 Characteristics of Media Audiences
8.3.3 Types of Audiences
8.3.4 Audience Typologies
8.4 Theories on Audiences
8.4.1 Bullet Theory
8.4.2 Individual Difference Theory
8.4.3 Social Category Theory
8.5 Audience Conception Traditions
8.5.1 Structural
8.5.2 Behavioural
8.5.3 Cultural
8.6 Approaches to Audience Research
8.6.1 Media Effects
8.6.2 Cultivation Analysis
8.6.3 Uses and Gratification
8.6.4 Cultural Studies
8.6.5 Reception Analysis
8.6.6 Everyday Life
8.7 Future of the Audiences
8.8 Pedagogical Approaches
8.9 Let Us Sum Up
8.10 Keywords
8.11 Further Readings
8.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.0 INTRODUCTION
This unit examines the concept of media audiences and its development historically. One of the elements of communication is 'the receiver'. The S-M-C-R (Sender- Message-Channel-Receiver) model, which is linear, gives no role to the 'receiver'. The subsequent two-way model, including feedback, made the 'receiver' active beings reacting to the message sent by the sender. The term 'receiver' became 'audience' when the message gained the character of public performance. But we use the term 'audience' in a variety of contexts. In the Indian context, we also call them 'public', say 138 general viewers in a cinema hall, to indicate those using mass media.

This unit will discuss the term's evolution, followed by the terminological differences Audience: National and
Global Contexts
between public, crowd, group, and audience. We shall also examine the characteristics and types of audiences, theories about audiences, audience conception, traditions, and a few of the audience research approaches.
8.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: explain the concept of the audience; describe the evolution of media audiences; identify the characteristics, context, and typologies related to media audiences; discuss the theories and approaches associated with media audiences; and explain the relevance of audiences in media studies.
8.2 HISTORY OF THE TERM 'AUDIENCE'
The term 'audience' is the most contested territory in media studies. 'Who is the audience' is often difficult to define for a filmmaker, a television producer, or a journalist writing a news report. Yet, all of them create a message for 'perceived' receivers. The audience is the one for whom the communication takes place. Senders vaguely define their audience - yet the discourse around 'audience' is open-ended. We do not call people waiting for the bus as an audience. An audience means the person has been engaging with the media. In oral cultures, the 'audience' was always present, whereas, with the emergence of the written word, the receivers and the sender were freed from the constraints of time and space. Written word made it possible to reach out to receivers not even anticipated by the sender. The beginning of printing and later with photography, sound recordings, motion pictures, radio and television, and now the Internet have changed the concept of the 'audience'. It has changed from a 'fixed', defined, homogeneous conception to polysemic, unstructured, diverse, and heterogeneous individuals. Though communication and theatrical processes are much older, the last quarter of the sixteenth century witnessed the gradual emergence of polarised identities of performers and listeners in musical performances. The emergence of the broadcast system then brought out the concept of individuals sitting in the privacy of their homes listening to the radio or watching television. These individuals were different from those attending lectures or concert halls. They were not located at the place where the message was created. Let us take an example: you are watching a film made on Mahatma Gandhi. Depending upon the type of film (documentary or feature film or actual footage), the film is made 'about' a time/place, it is made 'in' a time/place, and you, as a viewer, watch it in another time/place. Receivers, most often referred to as the 'audience' of mass media, are usually distanced from the senders. McQuail (2000) elaborates on the features of the Graeco-Roman audience, many of which can be applied to today's audiences. They are Planning and organisation of viewing as well as listening of the performances themselves; 139

MIL, Society and Ethics Events with public and popular characters; Secular (thus not religious) content of performance- for entertainment, education, and vicarious emotional experience; Voluntary, individual acts of choice and attention; Specialisation of roles of authors, performers, and spectators; and Physical locatedness of performance and spectator experience. The advent of mass media demanded the formalisation of its audience listeners, readers, and viewers for any medium - and they may not be directly observable. Most often, broadcast systems were privately owned or operated through state licenses. It became necessary for them to address public needs. So, even for economic reasons, assessing public opinion and sentiment to define the audience became necessary. Measurement of audiences was also essential for market research and advertising departments, which led to the development of measuring devices. Such processes impacted the conception of the audience. Figure 1: Audience during a television broadcast (Source: National Archives and Records Administration, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons) Media fragmentation and abundance in the late twentieth century have led to more focus on 'receivers' for varied reasons. With the Internet, the audience became further distanced from the physical notion of space and time. In the digital age, politically, socially, technologically, and even economically, the concept of audience demands a re-definition. This has led to the advent of Web 2.0, social media applications, and the diffusion of mobile phones, which has wired the world, creating and eventually breaking online-offline dichotomies. In the 21st century, with the creation of 'international' audiences, media have become more marketable commodities and cultural artefacts for world trade. Media messages are treated as goods that must be packaged, marketed, and distributed to reach perceptual 'audiences', some created by artificial demands, others pre-existent due to social and cultural affinity to the media and message content. Audiences then become 'consumers' of media goods. Media and entertainment became one industry covering publishing, film and television production, and performance genres, including various popular music and sports.

Unlike in the past, the audience is now defined more as a 'sociological' concept than Audience: National and
Global Contexts
the earlier 'physical' medium-centric concept. Audiences are socially situated and textually constituted subjects. They derive meaning or 'meanings' from the media text. John Fiske (2000), in his book Television Culture, defines audience as "the social subject has a history, lives in a particular formation (a mix of class, gender, age, religion, etc.) and is constituted by a complex cultural history that is both social and textual". Mosco and Kaye (2000) remark, "The concept of the audience is one of the governing ideas in mass communications research. It is also one of the most hotly contested...the concept was created largely out of marketing departments of companies with a stake in selling products through media". They further remark that it has expanded the scope of media studies, but it is puzzling why the discipline of communication studies keeps using this marketing concept.
8.3 UNDERSTANDING 'AUDIENCES'
If you examine your experience of listening to radio, watching television or films, listening to music, being on social networking sites, or even being part of a concert, you would know what it is to be a member of an 'audience'. The English word 'audience' has Latin roots - audire to hear. Mosco and Kyle (2000) elaborate on the context of the earliest use of the word in the 14th century. They remark that the audience referred primarily to formal hearings before a magistrate, court official, or sovereign and how the sense of power is inherently linked to the word/concept. We also use words like 'mass' or 'group' as the connotation of the audience. Let us understand how words have different meanings that get used interchangeably.
8.3.1 Public-Crowd-Group-Mass-Audience
You know your friends; it's a group. Usually, in a group, members know each other, share common values, know about membership, have a certain structure of relationships, and continue over time with some goals to achieve. The crowd is larger and restricted. It is observable and within a particular place. Crowds gather at the place of demonstration or an accident. It has spontaneity of formation and dispersal, unlike a group. The crowd also shares the same 'mood' and some degree of identity, but it has no structure, moral, or social composition. Unlike groups and crowds, the public is relatively large, more dispersed, and enduring. Public conceptually refers to political formation around a cause or an issue. Protesters and union gatherings indicate the public who work to achieve political change. Democratic societies gave rise to the need for 'informed citizenry'. Publics are thus linked to public opinion. In State-supported public service broadcasting, the audience is public, not the consumer, as with commercial broadcasting. McQuail (2000) attributes the credit for defining mass to Herbert Blumer in 1939. Unlike the other concepts, Blumer defined mass as a new type of social formation in modern society. Mass refers to different, heterogeneous, fluid, desperate, irrational, unintellectual, scattered, loose, anonymous, and large numbers of individuals as a collective. Mass reflects members not knowing each other yet sharing similar 'interests'. The concept of mass also assumes an element of manipulation by someone else. They are not self-aware, without self-identity, and incapable of acting together to attain objectives. Unlike the audience, mass is also used for 'mass market' and 'mass electorate'. 141

MIL, Society and Ethics Audiences as spectators for public events, readers of printed books, viewers of motion pictures visiting cinema-hall, television viewers, internet users, or members of social networking sites - indicate 'institutionalisation' by the media. Unlike mass audiences, audiences have been much more dispersed, individualised, privatised, and large due to the advent of digital media. Changes in technology and society impact audiences. Unlike all other concepts, media audiences are linked to media as receivers and are exposed to a common message. They have their likes and dislikes, interests and preferences, and expectations in their engagement with the media.
8.3.2 Characteristics of Media Audiences
Media audiences can be examined based on the following characteristics.
1) Numbers: Most media audiences are largely perceived in terms of numbers.
Being technologically mediated and involving large capital investments to reach them, audiences inevitably were considered 'numbers'. With the advent of multiple media outlets and distribution mechanisms, the physical number of the audience still matters to the 'sender' media institution. But in academic discourses, audiences do not only refer to 'number' but also to the 'social' context. So, the audience is not a mere quantity but has qualities.
2) Anonymity: The audience members do not know each other. Their nature
varies depending on the medium. There is no face to the audience. Sometimes, the audience gets appropriated and rejects messages the sender would have thought would succeed. The public knows everything, but the senders do not know them.
3) Heterogeneity: Media audiences vary in their primary characteristics as
individuals. They could be people of different ages, genders, or political ideologies having differential social and economic standing. They are not organised and self-acting.
4) Geography/Place: Usually, in the world before the Internet, transnational
television, and satellite radio, audiences were geographically constituted. In concerts and lecture halls, audiences are face-to-face, but media audiences are often not. Cinema halls and early television changed the 'localness' of print media readers. With new media technologies, audiences' time and place become much more anonymous, large, and passive.
5) Time: The audiences are also defined in terms of 'daytime', 'prime time',
'first telecast', 'repeat show', 'regular' or 'one-time', and so on. Prime-time audiences are usually considered working people, whereas afternoon shows are for homemakers. With newer technologies like Video on Demand, recording of live telecasts, and digital media, the notion of real-time audiences needs to be further studied.
6) Medium/Channel/Content: Media organisations try to define those they
attempt to reach out to as their audiences. By its very nature, the type of medium also defines the broad characteristics of its audiences. For example, newspapers are usually for literature, whereas radio programming language will define its intended listeners. Even within the same medium, genre/ type of content defines its audience. Language, semantic codes, genres, subjects, and styles define the audience for that message. In today's television

environment, channels differentiate themselves through content. Researchers Audience: National and
Global Contexts
have shown how genre defines audiences, like soap operas for women and sports and news for men. There is also a concept of a 'gendered audience'. Gendered audience refers to the nature, type, and volume of particular media usage by males or females and how their roles, preferences, and interests influence these choices.
7) Expectations: Audiences have certain expectations from the media to address
their information, entertainment, and education needs. Media makers also attempt to address audience expectations. Print and electronic media continue to 'measure' their audiences as precisely as possible to change their message content in line with audience expectations. Filmmakers often visit cinema halls to assess viewers' responses to their films.
8) Longevity: Audiences for any given medium may or may not be fixed
continuously; depending upon the medium, audiences may change their preferences or shift away. Even in a medium like television, the audience for a given program may vary as people move in and out of the channel or program using remote control. As a mass communication student, you must know that media audiences are rooted in society's social and cultural systems and techno- economic bases. Members of the audience produce, reproduce, develop, and distribute culture through media. In the following section, an attempt has been made to discuss different types of audiences.
8.3.3 Types of Audiences
There is no consensus on the types of audiences in media studies, as scholars have suggested varied classifications. We can broadly define it based on its size, geography, and sphere of usage. There can be a group audience or a mass audience. As you know from earlier discussions, a group refers to 'taste' culture or 'class' culture, such as people who like watching a particular program or like an actor. There is also a 'fan culture'. Group audiences usually have similar interests and are interested in particular 'types' of media content. The mass audience represents audiences created for mass media like television or film. The same media content is mass-distributed to people for mass consumption. We also refer to audiences as local, national, or transnational audiences. Unlike earlier music concerts or lecture halls 'local' audiences, mass media channels made most audiences 'national' or 'regional'. Satellite broadcasting and the Internet made transnational audiences possible. It is often argued that local audiences will likely have similar interests and homogenous characteristics. Local cable channels, community or campus radio stations, and newsletters create local audiences. Public service broadcasting creates a national audience. By sphere of usage, we imply the public or private sphere. Certain mass media have public character, for example, films in cinema halls, which the audience watches away from home and experiences a sense of being part of society/ collective in theatre. Research has shown that in non-Western societies, cinema-hall audiences have a distinctly different character than in Western societies. Even in folk performances like Ram Lila Bhavai or Lavani, the performer/viewer dichotomy does not exist, and audience members also become part of the performance. Private sphere media usage depends upon an individual's likes, needs, interests, or motivations. It is usually within the confines

MIL, Society and Ethics of the privacy of the home. Digital technologies, especially hand-held devices like mobiles or tablets, have merged the public-private divide. Today, you listen to people's most personal conversations in most public spaces or see individuals watching films on smartphones or tablets while travelling by train or bus with you.
8.3.4 Audiences Typologies
There are three main ways of defining the sender-audience relationship: Audience as a target, audience as a participant, and audience as a spectator. In its early and even present avatars, mass media transmit information and beliefs to its potential 'target'. Audiences are perceived as a destination for sending signals or messages for control or influence. Public service advertisements for anti-smoking or rural health missions are examples of target frameworks. In the 'participant' framework, based on Carrey's expressive/ritualistic model, audiences share and increase commonality with the sender. Communication, being normative, does not want to change the receiver. Television shows with studio audiences, dial-in radio shows, and online responses/comments by readers to newspaper articles are examples of a participating audience. In the spectator audience, the sender only seeks attention and does not want to transmit information or influence. The examples of sports matches advertising to catch attention are spectatorship instances. Figure 2: Types of audiences (Source: News 18, Carine06 from the UK, CC BY-SA 2.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) Ien Ang (1991), in her landmark book "Desperately Seeking the Audience", takes an institutional perspective. Referring to television audiences, she notes American television audiences are a 'market' whereas European television audiences are 'public'. She uses Rom Harre's concept of audience as a 'taxonomic collective', which is "an entity of serialised, in principle unrelated individuals who form a group solely because each member has a characteristic that is like that of each other" (Harre, 1991).

Check Your Progress: 1 Audience: National and
Global Contexts
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1) Mention differences between 'participant' and 'spectator' audiences.

8.4 THEORIES ON AUDIENCES
Some mass communication theories define the relationship between media and audiences.
8.4.1 Bullet Theory
Hypodermic Needle or Magic Bullet theory began in the 1940s and 1950s. It was born out of the stimulus-response assumption. It believed that the media had a direct, immediate and powerful impact on its audience. It also presumed that the media changed the behaviour of its audience. Messages were viewed as bullets, and the audiences were sitting ducks to be struck by the media. The theory came when Hitler monopolised mass media to unify the German public; radio and television became popular, and persuasion industries such as advertising and propaganda emerged. In his 1922 work titled 'Public Opinion', Walter Lippman emphasised the role of media. During that time, there were studies examining the influence of motion pictures on children and several propaganda theories. It was a time when the power of the media was overestimated. The theory views a needle or bullet being 'injected' or 'shot in' at the 'mass' audience, and the audience gets immediately influenced. The underlying assumptions are that audiences are passive, do not have other sources of information, and will believe whatever media transmits. There have been a few examples of this. The Indian media telecast of Lord Ganesha idols drinking milk, which made everyone else go and try it, or the American experience of 'War of Worlds' in the 1940s when millions of Americans believed that aliens were invading Earth, and so they fled their homes. Bullet theory assumes the audience is an enormous, undifferentiated mass. The theory was refuted when evidence of audiences rejecting media messages or differentially interpreting them came through research.
8.4.2 Individual Difference Theory
This theory was rooted in psychology after World War II and negated Bullet Theory. It stated that even if the media presents messages, audience members interpret them selectively. This selection is influenced by individual characteristics such as knowledge, attitudes, practices, mode of personal gratification from media consumption and so on. Individuals selectively choose exposure, attention, perception and retention. This theory presented that since the media messages are perceived selectively by the individual member, the retention, interpretation, and influence are also individual-specific

MIL, Society and Ethics as each individual possesses diverse psychological mechanisms. Media content, while activating them, does not do so indiscriminately. Unlike bullet theory, the media effect is limited as it is based on individual differences. This theory negated the role of social structures and the individual's membership in the social group. Since it isolates the individual from his/her social environment, it gives no framework to media producers to make messages for individuals. Uses and gratification approaches to audiences also stem from this theory.
8.4.3 Social Category Theory
This theory assumes that groups or categories of people with specific characteristics exist in any given society. Members of those groups or social categories react to the media messages in a similar way. Let us take an example of the response to an English music video or reality show on a Western channel, which would be easily accepted by young college-going youth compared to the elderly, who may disapprove of the presentation. Unlike individual difference theory, here, the selection by the individual could be based on his/her age, occupation, sex, income, education, prior exposure, and so on. An individual's social category or context influences the media attention and response pattern. All the three theories discussed above define the nature of the audience of the mass media. By now, you know that no single theory is right or wrong, and each theory explains the context in which they were born. It also needs to be understood that mass communication as a discipline is still inventing its foundation. Most earlier theories were born from sociology, psychology, anthropology, etc. Also, being a behavioural science, most theories are normative and culture-specific. Activity - 1 Select a television program of your choice. List your primary characteristics (age, education, sex, occupation, income, etc.) of the audience for that program. Now, try to talk to five people with similar characteristics and examine which of the above theories is applicable in the context of that television programme.
8.5 AUDIENCE CONCEPTION TRADITIONS
Now you understand that the audience has varied typologies and theories to relate them to mass media. Here, we will discuss how audiences have been conceived in three main traditions. Each of these traditions, in a way, represents the progression of audience concept through research methodologies and their relationship with media.
8.5.1 Structural
With the development of mass media, it became essential to know who was using which medium. This tradition looks at media systems and individual media use. Also known as audience measurement, it examined the 'reach' of print media based on circulation figures, gathering data essential for management to seek advertisements. Apart from the size of the audience, there is a need to know basic social compositions and link advertising with the market research industry. Structural tradition looks at demographics, amount and kind of media exposure, 'flow' of audience from one media to another, and so on. It is centred on questions like 'who does what with which media'.

8.5.2 Behavioural Audience: National and
Global Contexts
This tradition explores the effects and use of media by its audiences. As we discussed earlier, the early mass media research was based on the 'effects' of media on children or young people. Early studies viewed the audience as passive, receiving media unknowingly, getting exposed to 'impact' or 'influence'. Most effects research adopted experimental methods and manipulated communication (channel, content, reception) to examine audience response. Another type of behavioural tradition is media 'use' research. A lot of structural data was juxtaposed with the media use data to conclude media effects. A great deal of research on motives and selection patterns of audiences has also been undertaken within this tradition. Here, the question is 'What does the medium do to people?' unlike socio-cultural tradition, which questions 'what people do with media'.
8.5.3 Cultural
Unlike the previous traditions, this tradition looks at media as institutions and how audiences negotiate the meaning of media texts. Reception analysis, cultural studies and everyday life approaches represent this tradition. It not only looks at media content but also the context of reception. More qualitative and ethnographic, this tradition examines the social and cultural context of meaning production by audiences. It also examines how media messages are embedded in ideology and how audiences negotiate their meanings from those messages. The objective here is not to examine influence or use but the nature of relationships and rituals associated with the consumption by the audiences. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1. Outline the main characteristics of the following traditions of audience research:
1) Structural

2) Behavioural

3) Cultural

8.6 APPROACHES TO AUDIENCE RESEARCH
In the previous sections, we discussed how theories and traditions in media studies have evolved over the years and influenced the audience's conception. Now, we shall discuss varied ways of researching audiences and how that reveals their relationship with mass media. By now, you must have understood that the paradigms of role and relationship between media, audiences and society influence the approach to audience research. Following is a brief description of more prominent approaches to audience research.
8.6.1 Media Effects
One of the oldest approaches came into existence to understand audiences' responses to media content. Rooted in the stimulated immediate response model, the effects approach tried to establish a correlation between media messages and their influence on their receivers. This approach presumes that audiences mostly passively send and receive media messages. This approach was aligned with bullet theory, but it was eventually realised that numerous other variables interfaced with the message (sent and received) and response (as recorded). Characteristics of the source, the message itself, the channel, the context of reception, receiver motivations and needs, besides many extraneous factors questioned, affect research tradition. There are varied effects traditions, each with assumptions about the 'image of audience', 'text', 'societal context', basis of involvement, and hypothesised effects. Persuasion studies, knowledge gaps, uses, gratification, and diffusion also borrow from the effects approach.
8.6.2 Cultivation Analysis
George Gerbner and his colleagues are credited with this 'influential and sometimes controversial' research approach. 1969, it was named a cultural indicators research program, applied mainly to television audiences. There are three different elements to it: a) Institutional processes impact the production of media content through decision- making and policy formation. b) Message System Analysis, as messages are a reflection of mainstream modern culture. c) Relationship between exposure to television messages and audience beliefs and behaviours by comparing groups of light and heavy users of the medium under study. Figure 3: George Gerbner (Source: http://50.asc.upenn.edu, CC BY-SA 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0>, via Wikimedia Commons)

This approach to audience analysis examines macro-system-oriented as well as Audience: National and
Global Contexts
individual-oriented micro phenomena. The structure of culture, changes in that structure, and processes occurring within that structure are examined. It was criticised for emphasising the 'quantum of exposure' and negating other sources of information to the audience members.
8.6.3 Uses and Gratification
This approach was based on the works done on radio use by listeners in 1937 by Paul F Lazarsfeld (1901-1976), attitude change work by Carl Iver Hovland (1912-1961) and many others. Lazarsfeld's work intended to measure radio's impact on listeners' attitudes, leading to the development of opinion polls as a methodological tool for audience research. Hovland's work in social psychology examined propaganda studies and attitude changes in people. Gratification studies built on the notion of selectivity give an active role to audience members. It states that the viewer/listener chooses messages and media not only to define prior opinions and habits but also to satisfy needs, interests and strivings. Media are used to escape, achieve social mobility or for reassurance. Rooted in functional analysis, this approach links content and effects research.
8.6.4 Cultural Studies
Developed during the sixties and seventies, on the 'borderland' of social sciences and humanities, cultural studies most directly consider the audience. It focuses on the actual message or discourse of communication and the genre of media message. The critical research approach considers media as principal instruments of ruling elites for maintaining ideological control over its audiences. Unlike literary criticism, it explores popular and mass culture. Unlike all the three approaches discussed above, cultural studies are qualitative and critical.
8.6.5 Reception Analysis
From the quantitative tradition of audience research, reception studies brought in qualitative analysis in audience research. In the last twenty years, reception analysis has become an established field of study. David Morley's pioneering work of 'Nationwide' television audiences in 1980 is considered the beginning of reception analysis. You need to understand that cultural studies and reception analysis overlap, and cultural studies have broader concerns. Based on Hall's encoding/ decoding model, reception analysis viewed television programmes as 'meaningful' discourses or texts structured in dominant ideology. It refers to studies focusing on audiences' meaning, production, experiences, and interaction with media texts.
8.6.6 Everyday Life
Unlike earlier works on 'researching audiences', everyday life or day-to-day life approach borrows from humanities and focuses on subjectivity. It examines audience experiences and the role of media in their daily life. Rooted in reception analysis, it acknowledges that members of the audience interpret the media messages contextually. The circumstances, outlook and prejudices in 'everyday life' situations influence the reception of media content. Unlike the earlier passive audiences who were consuming media commodities, this approach, like uses and gratification, looks at audiences as active beings. The audience's active role is in interpreting the meaning of the media messages. 149

Activity - 2 List your expectations as an audience member for television news channels and newspapers. Do you find any difference? Analyse the reasons.
8.7 FUTURE OF THE AUDIENCES
While you read this, more and more content will be generated by social media audiences. With user-generated content on social networking sites and acknowledgement by the Main Stream Media (MSM), another dichotomy of writer-reader has disappeared. Now is the time of collaborative content generation and real-time interactivity. While the State is becoming increasingly rigid about forms of reaction and action by audiences, technology and society keep surprising everyone. There have been numerous examples of citizen journalism, where users post personal accounts of disasters or political insurgency, blogger protests, online petitions, flash mobs, etc. People who are not 'trained' to create media content are becoming 'producers' today. Alvin Toffler used the term 'prosumers' (producer/professional- -consumers) in 1980 in his book The Third Wave, which has turned out to be true. From Ang's question of 'what it means, or what it is like to live in a media-saturated world' in 1996 to Liz Bird's 'audiences are everywhere and nowhere' in 2003, audience research has come a long way. From the one-to-many and centre-to-periphery conception of mass media to the more diverse, one-to-one and many-to-many media, it will create newer audiences. Audiences today use media in multiple ways. For instance, you watch television on mobile and SMS your friend and update your status on social media in new areas for audience research.
8.8 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) Collect and describe examples of how people use various content providers and ICTs daily. Explore and examine the focus of entertainment celebrities and discuss who might be the target audience. Who is included, who is omitted, and what are the central themes and indicators that may reaffirm identity and audience? What do these sources tell you about how audiences use content? How might these uses be different from what the producers intended? Imagine how a family from a completely different background from the ones featured in the reality show, the entertainment performance, the news, etc., interpret some current television programmes or advertisements. What would this say about content providers and audiences today? What are the implications for society? Consider how marginalised groups- which might include indigenous people, racialised groups, groups with low socio-economic status or those in poverty, ethnic and religious minorities, women, and members of the LGBTQIA+ community (the groups may vary depending on the context)- relate to the mainstream media in terms of media representations and audience response. Analyse the messages and values conveyed through a popular media text, 150 such as a television programme and on social media. How might the messages

change if people of a different social group (e.g., age, ethnic background)were Audience: National and
Global Contexts
included or if the male and female characters switched roles? How might this impact the audience? What would change, why, and what might be the consequences if these changes took place? Analyse how language is a key factor in determining what content is presented, how, to what degree, and how it may affect what we know and how we act. Are local languages as readily available, present and influential as other languages? What is the impact of some languages being more predominant than others? Does it shape our knowledge base in favour of values, attitudes, and compartments that may not align with our local cultural values? Can hegemony be transformed into diversity? Discuss how people, especially students, engage with social media and how their engagement affects their daily lives regarding attitudes, behaviours and actions. What are the implications? Does their social media engagement go along with greater citizen participation or not? Is there an increase in "slacktivism", meaning civic actions are limited to clicking "like'' buttons or sharing posts? What are their key concerns and interests? Educators should research and further develop other activities concerning the nexus between global citizenship and social media.
8.9 LET US SUM UP
This unit exposed you to the concept of media audiences - their evolution, characteristics, theories, approaches and traditions to research them. The very nature of defining communication influences the way one views audiences. The audience becomes 'public' in public service broadcasting, whereas in commercial broadcasting, they are 'consumers'. Audiences differ in geography, time, heterogeneity, longevity, medium and expectations. There are three traditions of audience research- structural, behavioural and socio-cultural. Audience research approaches have differed from effects to everyday life and cultural studies to reception analysis. Now, you can appreciate that the audience is important in understanding media and society relationships. Media audiences define communication, and communication occurs because of them. With digital technologies, the future of the audience has become more dynamic as the audience has become media producers.
8.10 KEYWORDS
Audience : The social subject that has a history, lives in a particular formation (a mix of class, gender, age, religion, etc.) and is constituted by a complex cultural history that is both social and textual Magic Bullet Theory : The theory views a needle or bullet being 'injected' or 'shot in' at the 'mass' audience, and the audience gets immediately influenced Individual Difference : It states that even if media presents messages, members Theory of the audience interpret them selectively Social Category Theory : This theory assumes that there are groups or categories 151

MIL, Society and Ethics of people with specific characteristics in any given society. Media Effects Theory : The effects approach tries to establish a correlation between media messages and their influence on their receivers. Uses and Gratification : It states that the viewer/listener chooses messages and media not only to define prior opinions and habits but also to satisfy needs, interests and strivings. Reception Analysis : refers to studies focusing on audiences' meaning, production and experiences and their interaction with media texts.
8.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Ang, I. (1991), Desperately seeking the audience, Routledge, London Barnouw, E.
(1989) (ed.), International Encyclopedia of communications, OUP, New York.
2. Fiske, J. (2001) Television Culture, Routledge, London Hagen, I and Janet, W.
(2000) (ed.), Consuming Audiences? Production and Reception in Media
Research, Hampton Press, New Jersey
3. McQuail, D. (1997), Audience Analysis, Sage, California McQuail, D. (2000),
Mass Communication Theory, Sage, London Nightingale, V. (2011) (ed.), The Handbook of Media Audiences, Wiley and Blackwell, United Kingdom Ross, K. and Nightingale, V. (2003),
4. Media and Audiences: Issues in Cultural and Media Studies, McGraw-Hill
International, England
8.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1) The 'participant' audience is based on Carrey's expressive/ritualistic model.
It shares and increases interaction and commonality with the sender. Television shows with studio audiences, dial-in radio shows, and online responses/ comments by readers to newspaper articles are examples of a participating audience. On the other hand, the Spectator audience is the sender who only seeks attention and does not want to transmit information or influence. The examples of sports matches advertising to catch attention are spectatorship instances. Check Your Progress: 2
1) Structural tradition looks at media systems and individual media use. Also
known as audience measurement, it examined the 'reach' of print media based on circulation figures, data essential for management to seek advertisements. It is centred on questions like 'who does what with which media'.

2) Behavioural tradition explores the effects and use of media by its audiences. Audience: National and
Global Contexts
This tradition has also researched audiences' motives and selection patterns. Here, the question is, 'What does the medium do to people?'.
3) Cultural tradition looks at media as institutions and how audiences negotiate
the meaning of media texts. Reception analysis, cultural studies and everyday life approaches represent this tradition. The objective here is not to examine influence or use but the nature of relationships and rituals associated with the consumption by the audiences.

UNIT 9 TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA AND
SOCIETY
Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Evolution and Practice of Freedom of Expression
9.3 Purpose of Media in a Society
9.3.1 Four Pillars of Democracy
9.3.2 Watchdog Role of Media
9.4 Role and Accountability of Journalists
9.5 Public Interest Journalism
9.6 Issues with the Commercialisation of Media
9.7 Need for Alternative Media
9.8 Technology and Its Role in Society
9.8.1 Relationship Between Technology and Society
9.8.2 Technology and Inequality
9.9 Technology in Media
9.9.1 Technology, Media and Freedom of Speech
9.9.2 Technological Determinism and New Media
9.9.3 Ethical Concern: Ownership, Accountability, Surveillance and Privacy
9.10 Pedagogical Approaches
9.11 Let Us Sum Up
9.12 Further Readings
9.13 Keywords
9.14 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
In contemporary times, technology and media have emerged as indispensable societal elements. The marriage between technology and media has unprecedentedly expanded the horizon of communication and networking. The technological revolution has aided media development, from print to new media. We must note that it is through technology that media exists. You know that interpersonal communications are direct; however, interactions with mass media content are indirect since they depend on technology to facilitate the connection. With the advent of the technological revolution, we can see that new media formats are developed and presented to people more quickly than the media that came before. For instance, while it took "175,000 years for writing to become established, and about 1,000 years for printing to gain a firm foundation as a medium, audiovisual media (radio, television, and movies) penetrated society within a few decades, and digital media gained prominence in even less time" (Poe, 2011, p. 164). We live in a

media-saturated world and depend on many old and new media for information, Technology, Media and Society entertainment, and networking. Mass media and mass communication began 560 years ago with the "print revolution" that took place in Europe in the fifteenth century. As we evolved through the centuries, mass communication developed from mechanical to electronic transmission, giving way to the modern digital world. While technological developments are an essential part of the narrative about the media, the effects of media and technology on society are essential to the deliberation. Media technologies significantly impact society and imply that integrating technology and media into social settings greatly influences individual social interaction.
9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this Unit, you will be able to: understand the interconnectedness between technology, media, and society; outline the role of media in democracy; evaluate the importance of freedom of speech and expression; and analyse the global implications of technology and media.
9.2 EVOLUTION AND PRACTICE OF FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION
On principle, Freedom of Expression encourages the freedom of an individual or a community to communicate their thoughts and ideas without fear of retribution, suppression, or legal sanction. We must note that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) identifies the right to freedom of expression as a human right. In several countries, there is constitutional law that protects free speech. Words like freedom of speech, free speech, and freedom of expression are used synonymously in political discourse. In legal parlance, freedom of expression includes seeking, obtaining, and communicating information or ideas, irrespective of the medium used. Note under Article 19 of the UDHR, it is stated that "everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference" and "everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice". Therefore, freedom of speech and expression is the first condition of liberty. Globally, it occupies a favoured and significant position in the hierarchy of liberty. Many call freedom of expression the mother of all the other liberties that form the essence of any society and must be protected. "Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely according to conscience, above all liberties." - John Milton, Areopagitica In the late 6th century to early 5th century BC, the principle of free speech emerged in the ancient Athenian democracy. Notably, the values of the Roman Republic included freedom of speech and religion. In 1689, England's Bill of Rights approved freedom of speech as a constitutional right, which is in effect today. Meanwhile, the French Revolution of 1789 adopted the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen. Adopted in

MIL, Society and Ethics 1791, freedom of speech is a highlight of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. In India, the constitution secures rights to freedom of speech under Article 19 for every citizen. The preamble to the Indian constitution resonates with fundamental freedom as the liberation of thought, expression, faith, belief, and worship, which has been incorporated as a human right or particularly a fundamental right under Article 19 (1) (a). Universally, it is accepted that the very basis of a democracy is the unrestrained surge of words, ideas, thoughts, and expressions. The fundamental right to speech and expression devoid of any state control is not only imbibed in the constitutions and decrees of countries but also part of international resolutions such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to name a few.
9.3 PURPOSE OF MEDIA IN A SOCIETY
Freedom of speech and expression is considered the lifeblood of a democratic polity. It also is significant for the functioning of the media. In any democratic society, media is fundamental to political life, and the right to freedom of speech enables the media to work effectively. The purpose of media can be categorised as follows: Inform Educate Entertain Surveillance Correlation We must understand that media sway society in several ways. The common masses get information about the happenings worldwide through the media 24/7. Through round-the-clock media exposure, people form opinions and make judgments regarding different issues. Note that the media keeps people informed, educated, and entertained. The new media, electronic media, and print media are the primary sources of information. Since its initiation, the media has served as the overseer of the people and performs the surveillance function. The media dishes out all content from information about the budget, corruption, and scams to lifestyle and entertainment. Additionally, media has a correlation function, implying that the media's selection of news and its elucidation affects how society comprehends and responds to it. People's approaches toward political matters, events, public policy, etc., are predisposed by how the media structures and presents the issue in their discussions and presentations. For instance, The media's reporting of the Vietnam War played a critical part in altering the convictions of the American populace, who started opposing sending soldiers to fight a losing war.
9.3.1 Four Pillars of Democracy
Democracy is a form of government in which the people can deliberate and decide on the legislature or elect governing officials to do so on their behalf. Thus, democracy is

the rule of the people through their elected representatives. Note that freedom of Technology, Media and Society expression and the space to voice opinions by different sections of society are considered to be the merit of democracy. A democratic polity is founded on four pillars: i) Judiciary
- the Indian Judiciary manages the common law system. It comprises the Supreme
Court, High Courts, District Courts and Tribunals/Boards, and safeguards laws and orders that do not curb the citizen's fundamental rights. ii) Legislative - representatives voted by the people are part of the legislative body, responsible for making and changing laws. In India, the supreme legislative body is the Parliament (two houses, namely Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha) at the centre and the legislative assembly at the state. iii) Executive - is selected by the election system in India. The candidates voted to the parliamentary houses are the Members of Parliament (MP), and those voted in the state legislature are Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLA); iv) Media - is the overseer and is responsible for keeping the citizens up-to-date about the undertakings of executives, legislative and judiciary. Figure 1: Pillars of Democracy (Source: Jagran; 19March 2019, Maize & Blue Nation, CC BY 2.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) In the Indian context, the first three pillars maintain a system of checks and balances. Meanwhile, the latter, that is, the media, is the most influential entity. Media guarantees transparency in all three systems. The watchdog makes us conscious of several socio- cultural, financial and political issues in the country. Freedom of the press is not explicitly stated in Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution; it is the freedom of speech and expression mentioned. In the Constituent Assembly Debates, Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar, Chairman of the Drafting Committee, stated that no special mention of the freedom of the press was essential as the press, an individual, or a citizen were the same in the context of the right of expression.
9.3.2 Watchdog Role of Media
As stated in our preceding discussion, media plays a critical role in a democratic polity and society. We must note that the media, known as the fourth pillar of democracy, watches over the other three pillars, legislature, executive, and judiciary, by exercising the right of freedom of speech and expression. The media has been vested with being the watchdog and gadfly role in exploring misconduct by politicians, officials, private businesses, etc. The media is, therefore, a crucial apparatus of answerability, along with being an apparatus of communication. Globally, it is accepted that a free press, free media, and an independent judiciary serve as commanding counterpowers to corruption in public and private life. As the fourth pillar, the press bridges the government

MIL, Society and Ethics and the people. The bridge helps to create transparency at several levels, like access to information, answerability and legality of individuals, institutions and processes themselves, and equitable contribution and public debate. Activity - 1 Find out which agency of the central government disseminates information regarding government policies and projects to the media in India. Write a short note on this function. Note that the media, as the watchdog, acts as an instrument for the preclusion and inquiry of allegations of violations or malpractice. This watchdog role ranges from officials' culpability and actions while 'in office' and all other processes. For instance, media reporting on issues and candidates during an electoral process enables voters to form an opinion and aids in the electioneering process. In the context of India, the press has played a critical role in the freedom movement. The characterisation of the press as a social watchdog emerges from a classical liberal notion of the power associations between government and society within a democracy. The watchdog philosophy of the press is hinged on a pluralistic view of social influence. It is seen as "a simple extension to the (newspaper) press of the fundamental individual rights to freedom of opinion, speech, religion and assembly" (McQuail, 1994, p. 128). The watchdog function infuses the press as a medium for discussion, an investigator of indecorum, an adversary to domination and knowledge, and the protector of truth, freedom, and democracy. This is exemplified in the traditional notion of a 'fourth estate', historically attributed to Edmund Burke: "There are three estates in parliament, but in the reporter's gallery yonder sits a fourth estate more important than they all" (Carlyle, 1841, cited in Donohue et al., 1995:118). Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Define 'Freedom of Speech and Expression'.

2) Discuss the relevance of 'Freedom of Speech and Expression' in the context of
media and society.

9.4 ROLE AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF
JOURNALISTS
The media is weighed down by the heavy duty of being the communication channel between the government and the governed. Thus, the role of journalists is to work as eyes and ears of any newspaper or news channel. We must understand that a journalist's

role comes with great power and, thus, great responsibility. The media should work Technology, Media and Society transparently to ensure truthful, accurate, verified information is communicated to the public. Therefore, journalists are expected to work objectively, free from bias, as holding those in power accountable is no mean feat. Notably, the media must also hold itself answerable to serve the public. Both journalists and the media should be dedicated to the people's interests. Ideally, journalists do not create stories, and they are expected to provide factual and truthful information. Recently, "fake news" (planned misinformation) has been rising, which is the opposite of ethical journalistic practices. Fake news occurs when journalists are disordered, insensitive, and deceived by their sources. It also occurs when journalists, copy editors, or a producer produce a sensational headline or a "clickbait" (a practice of writing overstated or misleading headlines to draw clicks on a piece of content), expands and polishes the story further than is defensible by the facts. Such actions lead to the heresy of good press conduct and ethics. Figure 2: Examples of Clickbait journalism (Source:https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-wales-34213693) To ensure accountability and adherence globally, there are codes of conduct and ethics assigned to journalists. This emerges from the fact that media today does not continue to be only the Fourth Estate; it has secured a reputation in society and governance. The power of media can make or destroy any individual, institution, or thought. It is omnipresent and all-powerful, and with such voluminous power and strength, the media cannot lose sight of its freedoms, duties, and commitments. Some of the universally well-acknowledged ethical norms are as follows: a) Accuracy and fairness: Report verifiable facts, inaccuracies, and subjective remarks should always be avoided. b) Prepublication Verification: Journalists must verify and check the information before publication to avoid complications post-publication.

MIL, Society and Ethics c) Caution Against Defamatory Writings: Newspapers should not publish anything liable for defamation or libel against any individual or organisation. d) Privacy: Intrusion on the privacy of individuals is not approved unless dwarfed by genuine superseding public interest. e) Eschew Suggestive Guilt: Newspapers should abjure suggestive culpability by association. Implying they should refrain from identifying the family, relatives, or acquaintances of a person sentenced or suspected of a crime when they are entirely innocent, and a mention of them is not pertinent to the reported issue. f) Corrections: When any factual mistake or oversight is discovered or confirmed, the media organisation should publish the correction swiftly, with due distinction. g) Communal Reports: Appropriate corroboration before publishing reports on communal clashes or disputes must be done. Avoid identification of people based on caste, religion or community. h) Sensational Headlines: Headlines should match the contents of news stories and be unambiguous, precise, and authentic. A sensational headline is a strict NO. i) Abjure Vulgarity and Obscenity: Indecent and vulgar items should be avoided, and violence should not be glorified.
9.5 PUBLIC INTEREST JOURNALISM
Public interest journalism is "the news and current affairs media that has the primary purpose of recording, investigating, and explaining issues of public interest or significance" (Public Interest Journalism Initiative). This form of journalism is critical in guaranteeing that the community is reasonably informed, enabling citizens to participate in public debate and make informed decisions. Reporting can uncover corruption, remove dishonest people from public office, etc. Increasingly, the emphasis on public-interest journalism has grown, though no globally defined definition exists. It is the opposite of fake news, propaganda, censorship, and voyeurism. The defining characteristics of Public Interest Journalism include the following: Plurality Evidence-based Independence Neutrality Practical
9.6 ISSUES WITH THE COMMERCIALISATION OF
MEDIA
In the age of information society, one of the biggest challenges of the mass media is how to solve a fundamental paradox that has surfaced from the complicated realities of their professional practice. Globally, the mass media assumes two positions: i) a social

institution and ii) an industry. We must understand that an industry does not exist without Technology, Media and Society a product or service to offer to consumers. In the case of mass media organisations, the product they offer is 'content'. Several internal and external factors affect the mass media content decision-making process. A multi-layered process of gatekeeping exists in media content creation. The most crucial factor is the economics of the industry. We must understand that advertisers are an indispensable external influence in any calculation of the business aspects of the mass media. Advertisements generate all the revenue for privately owned broadcast media and the majority for print and new media. Media commercialisation refers to reorganising media structures, roles, and contents to indicate the profit-seeking targets of media industries. It underlines the notion that economic considerations regulate media products. Therefore, for any media organisation to stay floating in a competitive world media economy, it must produce enough revenue to cover the expenses and break even with substantial profits on investment.
9.7 NEED FOR ALTERNATIVE MEDIA
Let us first try understanding the meaning of 'alternative media'. It is defined as media sources that are different from mainstream media. Alternative media does not indicate a specific format and includes newspapers, magazines, newsletters, radio, television, films, new media, wall paintings, graffiti, street art, etc. In "Manufacturing Consent", Herman and Chomsky (1998) mentioned the evolution of the radical press in the first half of the nineteenth century in Great Britain. "This alternative press effectively reinforced class consciousness; it unified the workers because it fostered an alternative value system and framework for looking at the world", which encouraged them to collective action. At one time, this radical press threatened mainstream media and the legislature. Alternative media differs from mainstream media in content, production, and distribution. Alternative media should be seen as something other than the mainstream but a platform where opinions of all shades and pluralistic views are accommodated. Alternative media aims to voice different opinions rather than enunciate only mainstream media's popular or adverse opinions.
9.8 TECHNOLOGY AND ITS ROLE IN SOCIETY
Over a period, technology has become essential to the structure of society. It is an all- encompassing term referring to processes, methods, and tools resulting from scientific knowledge for practical functions. Technology is ever-evolving and is well-integrated into the functioning of society. For societies to flourish and develop, technological advances have become imperative. At the same time, human societies' cultures, beliefs, and ambitions have shaped how civilisations have been established, profited from, and burdened by technology. Some foundational role of technology in society includes: Defines how people communicate with each other daily Learning has become more interactive and shared Provides better access to resources Enables better livelihood opportunities Facilitated the formation of a network society and global citizen

MIL, Society and Ethics Helps economies to grow Better governance Infused scientific temperament in agriculture, sustainable development Increased workforce efficiency Healthcare and wellness advancements From the simplest form of technology, the prehistoric discovery of how to control, the invention of the wheel, to the modern-day printing press, the telephone, and the Internet, technology has played a role in the progression of society at every age. The amalgamation of technology in society has had far-reaching consequences, both good and bad. At the same time, humankind's benefits from technological advancements are well accounted for. You, therefore, need to consider the adverse outcomes of technology impacting society. One of the areas where technology has impacted adversely is the environment. Note that the Industrial Revolution ushered in new technologies with enormous power, leading to the transition to new manufacturing processes in the first world countries. This has been followed by prolonged industrialisation and more technological advancements in developed countries followed by developing countries. The impact of technology use on the environment has included the misuse and damage of our natural earth, leading to pollution, depletion of natural resources, and initiating severe climatic changes. Likewise, human well-being and health have been affected owing to excessive exposure to gadgets and other devices. The irony is that technology is being used again to find a remedy for the problems that emerged because of it.
9.8.1 Relationship Between Technology and Society
You understand that a symbiotic relationship exists in the above milieu between technology and society. A society is an organised cluster of people connected for social, political, and religious purposes, while technology is an application that enables the betterment of life. Note that the relationship between technology and society is reciprocal. On the one hand, society leads to technological change; on the other, changing technologies influence social evolution. It is said that 'necessity is the mother of invention,' implying that all technological inventions have been designed to meet the requirements of society. Thus, technology is inherently tied to the culture and its populace's activities. Studies have suggested that whatever problem technology solves, it can also modify society's behaviours and operations, which may result in new problems. Such alternations or new ways of life give way to even more technological innovations. In a broader framework, society may use technology to survive, prosper, and achieve higher levels of global development by establishing greater societal effectiveness. From a micro perspective, you need to note that technological developments change human behaviour to the point of modifying human adaptive processes and thus influencing organismic development.
9.8.2 Technology and Inequality
In recent times, there has been an augmented growth of technology. It has invaded several aspects of human life, including jobs, economic shifts, etc. Technology diffusion in daily life has taken place unprecedentedly: "The era of smart machines holds the

promise of a more prosperous future for all" (Qureshi, 2021, p. 17). Technology has Technology, Media and Society improved efficiency, expanded economic growth, provided better access to basic services, and supported knowledge and information dissemination. However, technology is a significant cause of inequalities in the modern day. Therefore, the question arises: is technology reaching out to everyone equally? Technology has been a strengthening influence on the global economy. Nevertheless, technology heightens marginalisation and inequality for those who cannot pay for it or earn a living through it. Unsurprisingly, technology does play a visible role in the job and will become more dominant. According to the World Economic Forum's (WEF) "The Future of Jobs" 2020 report, the pandemic interrupted labour markets with a turnaround in technology acceptance, job creation, and loss. A key report finding states that technology will accelerate with a "significant rise in interest for encryption, non- humanoid robots, and artificial intelligence". The WEF report also indicates that new jobs will overtake the market. By 2025, 85 million jobs may be replaced by a change in the division of labour between humans and machines. At the same time, 97 million new roles may arise that are customised to the new division of labour between humans, machines, and algorithms. You must understand the implications of such a shift. It will be coupled with the need for reskilling labour and expanding jobs requiring analytical, problem-solving, and self-management skills. Those who are unskilled or do not have the means to upskill themselves are more likely to lose opportunities. For example, as Artificial Intelligence becomes conventional, its unsettling effects are expected to be seen at an unmatched speed and scale, which emphasises the need for administrations and stakeholders to discuss and shape their collective future. Technologies and solutions ought to respond to the requirements of the poor, who need to be empowered to access and use such technologies. Technology should be used to implement the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which aim to reduce rather than accentuate inequality. This brings us to the question of the digital divide, which has widened the gap between 'the haves and have-nots. The digital divide is the disparity between demographics and regions regarding access to modern information and communications technology (ICT). Such technology includes the telephone, television, personal computers, and mobile and internet connectivity. Note that the gap typically exists between urban and rural areas, between the educated and the uneducated, between socioeconomic clusters, and, globally, amongst the developed, developing, and underdeveloped countries. Universally, though the uses and importance of Information and communication technologies (ICTs) are expanding radically, the disparity of the digital divide is also enduring. In the context of India, for example, education is impeded for many without internet access. This became evident during the COVID-19 pandemic when students in rural and peripheral areas could not continue online education without proper device access. The national survey by the Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER) and LIRNEasia found that only 20 per cent of school-age children in India had access to online education during the pandemic. Out of this 20 per cent, only half participated in the classes. Digital India initiatives have been taken up full throttle. However, the availability and access to infrastructure may not be available for all, widening the vicious cycle of inequality in the context of education, economics, gender, and governance.

9.9 TECHNOLOGY IN MEDIA
Technology is the lifeline of the media industry, from print and electronic to new media. Emerging technologies at every point have changed the way information is gathered and disseminated to the masses. Today, it is challenging to discuss media and how communication takes place in society without addressing the influence of technology on media. Technology is evolutionary, and one technology gives way to a newer, better version. Herein, you need to understand the concept of disruptive technology, which has had a colossal impact on the media. Disruptive technology can be understood as a product, service, or development that significantly impacts the functioning of an entire industry and/or may create new industries/markets. For example, the invention of the Internet and the World Wide Web created a niche for online media to develop, revolutionising content creation and consumption. Another example is automated journalism. Also known as Robot journalism, automated journalism is one of the industry's most debated examples of emerging disruptive technologies. Robots aid journalists, content creators, and publishers by explaining and examining data to produce content. Automated journalism also tests headlines and information sources and detects trending stories. 'Bandito', developed for The Washington Post, provides real-time analysis to distinguish the best-performing content and make enhancements to stories that do not quite 'hit the mark'. Activity - 2 Find out the following: a) What is multimedia? Define it. b) What are the components of multimedia?
9.9.1 Technology, Media and Freedom of Speech
With a brief on the all-persuasive nature of technology in media, you must examine the aspect of freedom of speech in this context. In India, Freedom of Speech is defined as a fundamental right in Article 19 of the constitution. Freedom of speech is the foundation of a democracy, which provides scope for the media to function. Media also serves as the custodian of that freedom. Freedom of speech and expression is generally understood as the idea that everyone has the natural right to liberally articulate themselves through any media devoid of outside intervention, such as censorship, fear of retaliation, threats, and intimidation. Freedom of speech is a complex right; it is not absolute, and traditionally, restrictions by law have been imposed on it. Media professionals globally have found themselves entangled with the administration through legal sanctions that have a bearing on freedom of speech and expression. Some laws that govern the freedom of speech of media include: The Parliament ordained the Cinematograph Act of 1952 to guarantee that films are exhibited in harmony with the walls of Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Indian Constitution. Sedition, Section 124A Indian Penal Code: this law states that anyone, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, visual representation, or otherwise,

attempts to bring hatred or disrespect or enthuses to stimulate disaffection Technology, Media and Society towards the government recognised by law shall be punished with imprisonment. Defamation, Section 499 Indian Penal Code: defamation is defined as communicating a fabricated statement, either orally or in writing, about a person that damages the individual's reputation. Written defamation is called 'libel', whereas oral defamation is 'slander'.
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media
Ethics Code) Rules 2021: one crucial provision of this law includes the Code of Ethics. It states that for news and current affairs publishers, the codes that apply are (i) rules of journalistic conduct formulated by the Press Council of India and (ii) the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act, 1995. For online producers of curated content, it requires them to (i) categorise content in itemised age-appropriate groups, limit access to age-inappropriate content by children, (ii) exercise discretion in presenting content affecting the sovereignty and integrity of India, and (iii) make content more available for disabled persons. Media operation and communication have been revolutionised with ever-evolving technology like the Internet. An open forum has been created for media to disseminate information aided by portable devices, laptops, tablets, mobile phones, etc. Progress in media and information technologies brings newer threats to the conventional notions of freedom of speech and opportunities to protect and extend those freedoms.
9.9.2 Technological Determinism and New Media
At this point, it is essential to draw upon the influence of technology on media and, thereby, on society at large. You can use the lens of technological determinism to understand the correlation. Technological determinism theory provides a causal connection between technology and society's nature. It examines the degree to which technological factors predispose human thought or action. The term 'technological determinism' was devised by Thorstein Veblen, stating that technology is the driving force of culture in society and regulates its progress in history. The modern information society is an offshoot of the development of innovations and new technologies that have socio-political implications. The Internet and the new media have altered society's structure. The development of computers, networks, and the Internet has profoundly transformed many features of human communication and how individuals act. Our networked societies include E-commerce, online education, e-governance, social media, and data journalism. Note that the term 'new media' encompasses computing, computer technologies and related data contents, and digital technology-mediated communication. The term 'new media' is fluid and evolving, with a focus on i) computer technologies and digital content production, along with ii) cultural forms and contexts in which technologies are used. With the advent of new media communication, the socio-cultural, economic, and political eco-system has been altered, creating new social norms and raising ethical concerns. Some impact of new media on society can be summarised as follows:

MIL, Society and Ethics Merits: Ease of access to varied information Enhancement of cross-cultural exchanges Global communication and networking enhanced Opportunities for newer kinds of jobs Prospects of learning new skills Development of alternate forms of media Demerits: Information overload Development of fake news Difficulty in verifying the correct information Loss of personal communication Concerns regarding data theft and privacy Addiction to gadgets has an impact on cognitive development Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Define the term Technological determinism.

9.9.3 Ethical Concern: Ownership, Accountability, Surveillance
and Privacy
In our efforts to understand the interconnectedness between technology, media, and society, the final focus is on ethical concerns. New forms of technology are reshaping the practice of a once simple means of communication, social norms, etc. News media employ communication technology to collect texts, videos, and images from across the globe with extraordinary speed and varying degrees of editorial control. The same technology permits news media to distribute this information to audiences worldwide. This increasingly competitive media industry has paved the way for ethical concerns that plague the workings of the industry globally. Media Ownership and Concentration: In the context of India, for example, media ownership has become more public through stock market listings. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in media has infused fresh capital via which consolidation takes place in the media sector. Note that the incursion of newspapers and news magazines into television and radio broadcasting and television media in newspapers has created integrated media businesses (Zee TV owns the DNA newspaper, Times of India owns TV Times Now, and Radio Mirchi). This media consolidation reduces competition, 166 limits choices for viewers, and lowers content quality.

Accountability: Often, media accountability is confused with self-regulation. Thus, Technology, Media and Society you should note the difference between the two. Media accountability holds the media accountable to the people it serves and the profession. Self-regulation implies initiating a code of conduct to avoid confrontation with the administration and law. The press council is one such example of self-regulation in media. Media accountability is a matter of contention, with the surge in fake news, advertorials, and paid news, wherein truth, fairness, and objectivity are compromised. Over time, the misappropriation of media freedom by manipulation, suppression, misrepresentation, propaganda, and disinformation has eroded the media's credibility as a social institution. Note that the loss of trust in media harms society's very functioning basis. Thus, the accountability of media is of paramount importance. Surveillance and Privacy: With the rise of social media, privacy concerns have surged. Occurrences of data thefts have distressed users and forced them to reconsider their interactions with social media and the safety of their personal information. You can refer to the incident of the consulting agency Cambridge Analytica, the firm misused the private information of over 50 million Facebook users to sway the 2016 American presidential election. Cyberattacks and data fissures are actualities of life for government organisations, businesses, and individuals alike in today's digitised and networked world. These mounting privacy concerns have provoked advocacy for tighter regulations. Some critical social media threats include Data Mining, Phishing, Malware Sharing, and Botnet Attacks. Technology has exposed people and society to newer vulnerabilities. It has altered how people function in day-to-day life in a highly technologically driven world.
9.10 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) While analysing the relationship between technology, media, and society, the following approaches can be taken forward to research and report the evolution of freedom of expression and press freedom in their country: Historical developments in the evolution of the theory and practice of freedom of expression and its correlation to press freedom Journalists and/or media agencies that have made specific contributions to press freedom and democracy Events in democratic movements where news media and news reporting played a significant role To highlight the relationship between technology, media, and society, the teacher can ask the learners to interview journalists on their views of the role of journalism in promoting or pursuing democracy. The interviewees can be requested to cite specific instances when media coverage played a significant role in the national or international landscape, as well as managing potential tensions between ownership and public interests. The educators then write a two-page reflection paper based on the interview, indicating the specific function of the media, how the media operated, and the key issues that were addressed.
9.11 LET US SUM UP
In current times, technology and media have infused the veins of society. The nuptial between technology and media has extended the horizon of communication and 167

MIL, Society and Ethics networking in unusual ways. While you understand that technological developments are an essential part of media development, you must also reflect on the effects of media and technology on society. Through technological determinism, you can understand how media technologies have transformed societies and civilisations globally. Undoubtedly, technology has many benefits, but it comes with a price. Technology has been a supporting factor for the global economy, media, and the like. However, technology intensifies marginalisation and disparity for those who cannot pay for it or earn a living through it.
9.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Elizabeth M. Perse, J. L. (2016). Media Effects and Society (Routledge
Communication Series). Routledge.
2. Neuman, W. R. (2010). Media, Technology, and Society: Theories of Media
Evolution (Digital Culture Books). The University of Michigan Press.
3. Shirky, C. (2011). The Political Power of Social Media: Technology, the Public
Sphere, and Political Change. Foreign Affairs, pp. 28-41.4. Winston, B. (1998). Media, Technology and Society. Routledge.
5. Yuvaraj, M. (2016). Adoption of technology in recruiting library professionals
and faculty members: A case study of social media in India. The Bottom Line, 241-250.9. 13 KEYWORDS
Freedom of Expression : Freedom of Expression encourages the freedom of an individual or a community to communicate their thoughts and ideas without fear of retribution, suppression, or legal sanction. Public-interest journalism : The news and current affairs media that has the primary purpose of recording, investigating, and explaining issues of public interest or significance Technological determinism : Technological determinism theory provides a causal connection between technology and society's nature. It examines the degree to which technological factors predispose human thought or action. Media accountability : Media accountability holds the media accountable to the people it serves and the profession.
9.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1) Freedom of speech is a code that supports the freedom of a person or a
community to articulate their opinions and ideas without fear of retaliation,

censorship, or legal sanction by the administration. Article 19(1) (a) of the Technology, Media and Society Indian Constitution states that "all citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression". The values behind this Article lie in the Preamble of the Constitution, where a vibrant resolution is made to protect all its citizens, liberty of thought and expression.
2) 'Freedom of Speech and Expression' is a complex right that necessitates
ethical usage of the power it bestows on the citizens and, thereby, the media. It is a mechanism that can be used for good and bad, where the danger lies. Media is a very powerful means of exercising freedom of speech and expression. However, it has also been progressively used for unlawful and unethical practices, which have enabled the government to censor the media. While on the one hand, the misappropriation of media necessitates the need for legal censorship, on the other hand, there are justifiable concerns about the infringement of the civil rights of people as an inescapable consequence of censorship. Thus, it becomes imperative that within the purview of 'freedom of speech and expression, ' media operates via self-regulation, which ensures the fourth pillar of democracy works for the public. Check Your Progress: 2
1) Technological determinism is a theory that provides a causative connection
between the nature of society and technology. It states that a society's technology regulates its traditional principles, social structure, and history. According to the theory, social progress follows an inevitable curse driven by technological innovation.

UNIT 10 FREEDOM, ETHICS AND SOCIAL
ACCOUNTABILITY
Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 Concept of Self-Regulation, Code, Law and Ethics
10.3 Code of Ethics
10.3.1 Cannons of Journalism
10.3.2 Commission on Freedom of the Press
10.4 Essential Ethical Values
10.5 Emerging Ethical Areas
10.5.1 Diversity and Sensitivity
10.5.2 Advocacy and Ethics
10.5.3 Use of Hidden Cameras
10.5.4 Introduction to Digital Media Ethics
10.6 Code of Ethics on New Media
10.7 Rights and Ethical Responsibilities of Citizens
10.7.1 Ethics Related to Citizen Journalism
10.7.2 Instances of Ethical Violations
10.7.3 Do's and Don't's of Ethical Violations
10.8 Pedagogical Approaches
10.9 Let Us Sum Up
10.10 Further Readings
10.11 Keywords
10.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
10.0 INTRODUCTION
The role of media professionals is not merely to inform the public but to inform the public ethically, primarily keeping the tenets of freedom of expression and their social responsibility and accountability in check. In this Unit, we shall focus on the ethical value systems you can set for yourself as a media professional to face the challenges in your day-to-day work. We shall start by defining the concept of self-regulation and distinguishing between codes, laws, and ethics to understand the subject better. Then, we shall briefly look at some important codes of ethics, such as the Canons of Journalism and the Commission on Freedom of Press report, to link them with the present times to understand how these ethical principles are still valid and pertinent. We shall examine the universal tenets of journalism or 'essential shared values' and discuss some emergent areas of ethics such as diversity and sensitivity, advocacy, digital media ethics, citizen journalism, and sting operations. This discussion will explain how media ethics and self-regulation

are interlinked. If media professionals follow certain ethical principles and norms, it will Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
lead to self-regulation on their part and the profession. Moreover, with the advent of the Internet, a great deal of content is being created online, and it is important that the Internet remains open and transparent and protects the rights of individuals contributing to sharing and exchanging knowledge. This allows them to create content freely and fosters creativity while making knowledge accessible to everyone. The temptation to copy or modify easily available content is difficult to fight. Ownership, privacy, confidentiality, and intellectual property need to be respected in virtual life, just like in our real life. Therefore, new media ethics can be described as a set of ethical considerations defining our online conduct. New media ethics tell us how to use new media appropriately without breaching any law or infringing on the online rights of other users. In this Unit, we will also emphasise the model code for creators, distributors, and users of online content.
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: distinguish between codes, laws, and ethics; describe universal media ethics; analyse emerging ethical areas such as diversity, advocacy, and digital media; describe the different aspects of new media ethics; and discuss the importance and challenges related to it.
10.2 CONCEPT OF SELF-REGULATION, CODES,
LAWS AND ETHICS
At the outset, let us look at the concept of Self-regulation, a voluntary act by an individual media professional and a media organisation. Any external agency does not impose it; therefore, it carries more credibility in the eyes of the public. Self-regulation ensures that the media can operate independently, which is in the interest of the media, its different stakeholders, and the audience. Several self-regulatory mechanisms exist for the Indian media to facilitate ethical conduct, such as codes of ethics, press councils, and ombudsmen. Organisations like the News Broadcasters Standards Authority (NBSA) and Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) have been set up as an internal self-regulatory mechanism for television (news and entertainment), respectively. Self-regulation is not a new concept, as it has existed for a long time in the form of codes of conduct, ethics, and practices. These terms are often used interchangeably, but each has a different meaning and scope and is also interlinked in some ways. Let us look at them in detail for a proper understanding and application. Code: Code is a systematic set of guidelines or framework for standard moral behaviour
- it is an index of what is generally considered desirable. A code is a document that
sets out guidelines to proscribe particular types of conduct deemed unethical and identify other types of conduct as being ethical. According to Retief (2009), "it serves as the

MIL, Society and Ethics conscience of the worker as an individual and the organisation as a whole". A code is not a legal document and cannot be enforced by law. Some scholars argue that codes work against the independence of the free press and lead to self-censorship. However, it cannot be denied that adherence to codes can make the recurrence of past mistakes less likely and improve future work. Law is a set of rules established in a social system that demand or prohibit specific actions. The courts of law govern these and are abiding by their people, and breaking the law is punishable. Some media laws, such as the Contempt of Court, Libel and Defamation, Official Secrets Act, etc., will be discussed in detail in Block 2 of this course. However, laws have limitations because new areas keep emerging, and the Government cannot enact laws for every situation. Some occasions require carefully interpreting the existing regulations to determine the best course of action. Ethics: Ethics do not involve applying formal codes and rules but are more like self- check or self-control; thus, they are all about personal decisions and practices. Ethics is not law, although law often stems from a society's ethical values at a specific time. Violations of the law involve punishment, whereas ethical misconduct does not. According to American media theorist John C. Merrill (1982), "law is socially determined and socially enforced. Ethics, on the other hand, is personally determined and personally enforced". Ethics provide a media person with certain fundamental principles or standards by which s/he can judge an action as right or wrong, good or bad, responsible or irresponsible. Thus, ethics is primarily personal, and law is predominantly social. Ethical standards are individual and internal, and an outside force cannot punish them.
10.3 CODE OF ETHICS
Different bodies and institutions have formulated various codes of conduct from time to time. According to a UNESCO report, more than 370 Codes of Practice are said to be listed by the International Press Council in different parts of the world. Although journalists generally resist any code as these are seen to keep a particular check on their freedom of expression, codes of conduct are aimed to help the journalists and contribute to their freedom. It is believed that a good code does not impose restrictions; instead, it flags the problem areas that need to be anticipated and avoided in discharging their duties. Some media organisations prefer codes of practice or ethics instead of codes of conduct. Whatever the terminology, they all aim to develop a responsible attitude in exercising journalistic duties and creating a 'collective conscience of the profession'. It will be useful to take a brief overview of the evolution of codes of ethics to analyse how the ethical values outlined by them continue to be pertinent and meaningful today.
10.3.1 Canons of Journalism
The first code of ethics for journalists was adopted in 1910 in the United States by the Kansas Editorial Association, which William E. Miller wrote. The Kansas Code was primarily focused on advertising and called for advertising policies that were "forthright and fair and news that was honest, just and decent. In another initiative, journalists formed the American Society of Newspaper Editors. It adopted an ethical code called "Canons of Journalism" in 1923, highlighting the importance of responsibility, freedom, independence, honesty, accuracy, impartiality, fair play and decency. These Canons were adopted as a model followed by other newspaper and press association codes.

The Radio Code was adopted in 1928 and was later expanded into the Radio and Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
Television Code, covering advertising and programme content. However, adherence to these codes was voluntary, and noncompliance went unpunished. According to Ferre (2009), "concern for journalism ethics became synonymous with culling values from the facts of human experience so that reporters could produce news that was neutral, unbiased and factual". The advent of television was a watershed in the history of media, which hit the imagination of the masses and briefly eclipsed radio and cinema. It also led to the significant expansion of media organisations and the growth of the advertising industry, "which financed daily newspapers, magazines and books". All these developments led to increased media concentration in a few hands, and the US Government made various efforts to break the monopoly of large media companies and provide diverse perspectives. Activity - 1 Examine a code of ethics established by international journalist associations or national media organisations (one example is the code of ethics established by the International Federation of Journalists; another example would be the BBC's professional standards). Assess the intended purpose of each element of the code. Discuss why a code of ethics should be developed and agreed upon by the members of the profession themselves and not imposed by external agents or authorities. Discuss the mechanisms needed to enforce the code of ethics Look for examples and examine the differences between 1) code of ethics and 2) code of conduct ethics established by international journalist associations or national media organisations, for instance. Discuss self-regulation, forms of co-regulation, and statutory regulation. What are the pros and cons of each for professional, independent journalism?
10.3.2 Commission on Freedom of the Press
The US Commission expanded the scope of media ethics on the Freedom of the Press under the chairmanship of Hutchins in 1947. It called upon the press to provide " trustworthy "daily news, a form of public expression, inclusive reporting free of stereotypes. These stories pursue and probe democratic life and universal access to daily news. It reaffirmed the principle of freedom and that press plays an essential role in political and social life". The Hutchins Commission report identified five essential requirements against which the performance of media institutions might be measured: "The press must provide a truthful, comprehensive and intelligent account of the day's events in a context that gives them meaning. In this process, facts are insufficient; the truth about the facts (relevant background surrounding the facts) is also essential. Media should put stories in perspective and evaluate the credibility of conflicting sources. The press must serve as a forum for exchanging comments and criticism.

MIL, Society and Ethics The press should project a representative picture of the constituent groups of society. Racial, social and cultural groups should be depicted without resorting to stereotypes. The goals and values of society should be presented and clarified. The press should provide full access to the day's intelligence". These could be accomplished if the press was more responsible, journalists were better trained, and the press effectively regulated itself. Self-regulation was considered the key feature, and government intervention was the last resort. The Hutchins Commission laid the foundation for Social responsibility theory and stimulated a series of attempts to describe normative media theories. Ferre (2009) argued that although the press ignored the Hutchins Commission report, the social responsibility aspect was taken seriously by Journalism Schools. McQuail (1998) observed that "these recommendations were followed by many different codes of ethical conduct depending upon the conventions and traditions of the country and on who formulated the code - whether it was publishers, editors, journalists or an external regulatory body". Retief (2009) believed that these codes' most crucial contribution was safeguarding media freedom and preventing government regulation of the media. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Why is it important for a media professional to develop a strong value system?

2. What do the Canons of Journalism stand for?

3. What is the role and importance of a code of ethics?

10.4 ESSENTIAL ETHICAL VALUES
Every media professional should strive for specific essential ethical values traced across cultures and nations, such as truthfulness, fairness, independence, accountability, objectivity and privacy. These are briefly recapitulated here as they are crucial for quality journalism, empowering ordinary readers, and maintaining democracy. Accuracy: As we know, journalism is a vital public trust. Its objective is to inform people of the rights and wrongs committed, expose corruption, and unearth scandals in different sectors of life. A truthful account of an incident is accurate, factual, and based on evidence and aims to bring the truth out in the public sphere and lead 174 democratic debates on a given issue. It is substantiated by cross-checking facts and

figures and guards against rumours, speculations and hearsay. Pre-publication verification Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
is a cardinal principle of good journalism. Accuracy, besides factual details such as names, places, dates, times, people involved, spellings, etc., is maintained using appropriate headlines that are not misleading and justify the story. The recent trend of re-enactments and dramatisation in news channels tends to colour facts. Accuracy also has to be ensured during editing as well as translation. As discussed in the previous Unit, the mad rush to break stories may lead to factual errors. According to famous journalist Carl Bernstein, "The greatest felony in the news business today is to be behind, or to miss a big story. So, speed and quantity substitute for thoroughness and quality, for accuracy and context. The pressure to compete, the fear somebody else will make the splash first, creates a frenzied environment in which a blizzard of information is presented and serious questions may not be raised". Since news stories are written/telecast under tremendous pressure and in a hurry, even the most meticulous and conscientious journalist will likely make mistakes. Senior journalist Vinod Mehta (2011) emphasised, "Every effort should be made to prevent it by being extra diligent and giving attention to the details. However, in case of a bonafide bloomer, instead of a cover-up, you should bring it to the notice of your seniors, and clarification may be issued as quickly as possible. Subsequently, all efforts should be made to ensure accuracy at all levels to maintain your credibility and the organisation you serve". Objectivity: Emphasising the need for objectivity, famous journalist C.P. Scott said, 'Facts are sacred; the comment is free". Objectivity involves the separation between news and opinion. It is often argued that the neutrality of journalists is a myth, as they tend to have strong views. Media houses work under various pressures, including those from the Government, advertisers, corporate houses, and PR agencies. As a media professional, the fundamental question you must ask is to whom you are accountable. Is it the Government of the day, the management of the media house, the advertisers, corporate houses or the PR agencies? If journalism is a public trust, then your ultimate accountability lies with the common reader/viewer/listener, especially the deprived and marginalised sections of society. Privacy: Maintaining privacy is yet another essential ethical issue. You would have noticed that television channels often transgress the boundaries of decency in their mad rush for TRPs. Intrusion in private grief is a charge made on media very often as media tries to capture each drop of tear, whether a common layperson, celebrity or even a national icon. For example, the family of Nelson Mandela, an anti-apartheid hero, while on life support in a hospital, accused the news crew of obstructing entry to the hospital, making themselves a significant nuisance. His daughter called the foreign media 'vultures' who failed to respect the family's feelings while covering the deteriorating medical condition of Mandela. Some scholars argue that privacy can be breached only when there are sufficient reasons that the issue is for the 'public good'. However, the need to maintain sobriety and decency cannot be overemphasised at any stage.
Essential Shared Values
The above discussion can aptly be summed up in the words of Elliott (2009), who identified the following 'essential shared values' sustained across cultures and time:

MIL, Society and Ethics 1) "Journalists should strive to publish news accounts that are balanced, accurate, relevant and complete (BARC).
2) Journalists should strive to publish news accounts that are BARC without causing
harm that could be prevented.
3) Journalists should strive to give citizens the information that they need for self-
governance. This principle is the defining principle for the practice of journalism and the one that justifies causing harm in the production of news stories. If citizens need to have that information, it is justified to publish it, even if the information causes damage to some individuals or group". Thus, you must develop your own ethical value system, which you must adhere to without any outside pressure and interference to retain your freedom.
10.5 EMERGING ETHICAL AREAS
As societies become complex, new issues keep emerging, expanding the nature and scope of media ethics. You will require different skill sets and strong ethical principles to face such emerging challenges. Moreover, the role and canvas of a media professional are also changing. In addition to reporters, journalists and sub-editors, some of you will also work as web designers, camera persons, producers and editors. The ethical dilemmas you will face in discharging your respective roles will also vary. You may also need specific ethical principles besides the general principles discussed above. For example, as a television producer, you may have to take care of your camera angles, especially while looking at women and children subjects. It has often been found that while focusing on children, the camera 'looks down' at them, posing serious ethical concerns - the same holds for female subjects. Similarly, while editing the content of an interview, you will have to guard against selective editing. Let us look at some such ethical dilemmas that need to be considered.
10.5.1 Diversity and Sensitivity
For a country like India, with a population of over 1.2 billion comprising varieties of class, caste, religion, ethnicity, sexual orientations, disability and geographical areas, diversity is a huge ethical issue. There are several regions and linguistic zones, each with a distinct culture and identity; various languages are spoken, including 22 officially recognised languages and about 1652 dialects across the country. In a liberal and democratic set-up, all members and groups enjoy equal rights. However, it has often been found that specific issues and concerns relating to disadvantaged sections of society, Dalits, disabled, minorities and those in far-flung areas do not get adequate media space, which further suffers due to stereotypical representations. Identifying people by race/caste/religion/community is a charged media has often been faced with, which can be avoided unless genuinely relevant to the story. According to Whitehouse (2009), if one segment of society is ignored, vilified or even inappropriately sanctified through mass media narratives, those marginalised and the community as a whole will be harmed. To take the example of the projection of women, various studies have revealed that issues related to women have largely been invisible in media unless they are crime- related or sensational. Women rarely get covered as contributors to development and governance. Although employment opportunities in media have increased for urban-

educated women, the representation of women continues to suffer from stereotyping, Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
showing them as victims and belonging to weaker sections. Violence against women, especially rape, one of the most heinous crimes against women, has come centre stage lately. You may recall the brutal gang rape on a Delhi bus in December 2012, which became a defining moment and highlighted the patriarchal attitudes and misogyny on the part of the perpetrators of the crime. The widespread public outrage brought people across the spectrum together with the media as a strong ally. The continued media focus and coverage led to the issue gaining new prominence in the public discourse, including political party manifestoes, election campaigns and even the Union budget. According to the National Crime Report Bureau, the incident accounted for increased reporting of crimes as more women feel empowered to come out with their cases. However, a word of caution here is a need for balanced coverage in such sensitive issues as the clamour for instant, and retributive justice can even turn counter-productive and harm the cause itself, as shown in the 2019 Hyderabad gang rape case. Media may not be the fundamental cause of the problem as it does not exist in a vacuum. However, it is in the power of the media to give a realistic and adequate portrayal of their problems and concerns.
10.5.2 Advocacy and Ethics
The above discussion brings us to the issue of advocacy and ethics. Advocacy stems from the word advocate - a person who pleads in favour of another; thus, advocacy is support or argument for a cause. One may argue that if a media person takes a position on an issue, it is at variance with the concept of objectivity. However, advocacy is based on the premise of human rights, democracy and peaceful coexistence. Baker (2009) argues, "Advocacy is for noble (or morally justifiable) causes with moral virtue and with principled motives and means. A principled advocate embodies and enacts truth, transparency, respect and concern for disadvantaged sections of society". S/he follows the path of equity, equality and social responsibility, treating people empathetically. Mehta (2011) observes that a journalist occasionally has to cover an incident or event with stipulated two sides. Still, one side is so horrific and unforgivable that you may decide to concentrate on just that side. You can take sides when confronted with one of these terrible happenings, but basic guidelines must be followed. Some examples in this regard could be acid attacks on women, environmental degradation, pollution, and so on. Thus, harnessing communication for worthy purposes with moral means to achieve professional objectives is ethical. However, suppose advocacy is used for self-interest, deceit, manipulation, and disregard for others. In that case, it leads to the loss of face for all those involved and the lowering of society's moral compass.
10.5.3 Use of Hidden Cameras
As you know, there are three types of journalistic writing - Objective, Interpretative and Investigative. Objective writing is neutral, balanced, factual, and purely for information dissemination; interpretative writing involves analysing and interpreting complex issues, claims made by the government and policy issues. The investigative report works on the premise that something somewhere is wrong and aims to dig beneath the surface in search of 'why' and 'how'. The primary objective of investigative journalism is to uncover the truth for the public good. This pursuit follows an adversary role, whether it is the Government or the corporate sector.

MIL, Society and Ethics Investigative journalism involves a detailed enquiry of reports, documents and developments. Sting journalism is an offshoot of investigative journalism. Operation West End, Operation Duryodhan, Operation Chakravyuh, BMW Expose Case, and Cash-for-Vote Scam were some cases where sting operations using hidden cameras were conducted. However, using hidden cameras raises thorny privacy, entrapment, and accountability issues. Since the filming of a person is done covertly, it leads to the erosion of privacy and, at times, even obscenity. In some sting operations, illegal methods, such as bribery, trespass, etc., have also been reported. Sting operations should not be used as a shield of public purpose in the garb of settling one's scores and can land the reporter in trouble regarding defamation, libel, etc. The journalist needs to ensure accuracy and observe general standards of decency. Care should be taken to ensure that there is no selective editing and that the context of the footage used is demonstrated. The identity of those not directly related to the event but caught on the footage must be masked. The content must be conclusive without loose ends so that it does not leave room for confusion and interpretations. In addition to the areas discussed above, ethics are linked with other aspects such as war and conflict reporting, reporting sub-judice matters and so on. A firm grounding in ethics will enable you to make correct decisions in these areas.
10.5.4 Introduction to Digital Media Ethics
Digital media is a rich information source enabling information sharing and dissemination without any filters or means to restrict the content. The new media has radically changed how news is collected and disseminated and emerged as a challenge to traditional journalism, which is seen as a one-way transfer of information. Many of the population, especially the youth, are increasingly dependent on new media platforms for their information and entertainment needs. Social media platforms are being extensively used for sharing views and also as news sources. The authenticity of these sources may be difficult to verify as, at times, people use pseudonyms or write anonymously. Often, when a comment is made on Twitter or Facebook, it is countered aggressively or 'trolled' systematically by the opposing group or party. The trend is especially pronounced in political comments or in which celebrities are involved, leading to sensationalism and vilification of those involved. Some of these comments may be selective in nature and contribute to partisan interests using provocative language. Since journalists follow social media trends like a wire service, at times, such trends get reflected in the mainstream media. Attribution of the source is yet another area of ethical concern. Publishing news not attributable to any source or under the guise of unnamed or unidentified sources indicates poor journalism. Some websites clearly state that the content on the site can be used freely, while in some instances, there are conditions to use. The material is used with appropriate citations for educational purposes, research, etc. However, permission must be taken from the individual or organisation concerned for commercial purposes. Various cyber crimes, such as morphing, phishing, data theft, hacking, cheating, and pornography, have further compounded the digital sphere. Digital manipulation of images and pictures and selective editing can lead to misrepresentation and misinformation. It is extremely difficult to get evidence, and often, the real culprits may be operating from other countries and beyond the purview of the Indian legal system. The conviction rate in cyber crimes is abysmally low, and lengthy judicial procedures further compound

the process. New crimes emerge daily, calling for preventive measures such as training Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
on new software and constant updates of knowledge to address some of these concerns. Figure 1: Types of cybercrimes with cybersecurity measures at the core Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the essential ethical values needed in a media professional?

2. Why is it important to consider diversity and sensitivity in media ethics?

10.6 CODE OF ETHICS ON NEW MEDIA
All the content on news websites may not come from reliable sources and can also be inaccurate. In such cases, it is prudent that the users be informed when a news item is less reliable or has been edited only after being taken from another source. This helps them to be better prepared to handle such information. In the case of images, new end technologies have facilitated the easy capture, sharing, and transmission of data. Also, in many cases, the news may need to be verified, or inappropriate images could appear beside stories, thus requiring the reader to be discerning. The reports generated through anonymous sources and hoax data are also commonplace. During the second season of IPL, a blog named 'Fake IPL Player' was started. The anonymous writer was believed to be a Kolkata Knight Riders team

MIL, Society and Ethics member but could not be identified. The blogger's identity was revealed only after the writing caught international attention and garnered a huge number of visitors. Before that, the team management had taken measures like curbing internet access and banning laptops from stopping the posts. This is the downside of information coming in through new media. It is impossible to ascertain the source and authenticity of the information correctly. The problem is also faced by news employees who want to share their thoughts online. Companies are often not open to allowing this since it can lead to many problems. For instance, a person's remarks about a group or community could be hurtful and incite violence, ending up spoiling the company's reputation. To avoid this, many companies have devised clear guidelines so their employees can use social media fearlessly. They often spell this out as 'Social Media Policy. For this reason, the leading publication, Los Angeles Times, has drawn up a social media policy. It says that:
1) Principles of integrity, professionalism, privacy and impartiality should be
observed by journalists when posting online.
2) The authenticity of what employees post is important. Online journalists should
verify questionable content with credible sources before posting or tweeting about it.
3) It is essential for employees to properly define their association with the
publication as they would do offline. Thus, it is clear that both content producers and readers need to have a system of checks and balances for their online behaviour. Their etiquette cannot be controlled but can be guided with the help of social media policies, drawing up ethical guidelines etc. Activity - 2 Examine a code of ethics established by information professionals, such as libraries or archivists, including major principles and values. See how this code could potentially differ from a code of conduct established by international journalist associations or national media organisations. Discuss differences between directional and aspirational codes Discuss differences between codes of conduct and codes of ethics Discuss information ethics issues related to accuracy, transparency, ownership, access, privacy, security and community Discuss how information ethics influence personal decisions, professional practice and public policy Discuss how evolving new information formats and needs influence ethical principles and how these codes are applied (e.g., social media policies, digital preservation, privacy, and access to public information).
10.7 RIGHTS AND ETHICAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF
CITIZENS
It is not just the content creators who need to be restricted by ethical boundaries; here are unwritten protocols for readers. Something as innocent as 'liking' a page or tweeting

on a trending topic can sometimes lead to a violation of online ethics due to the nature Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
of the content. Other issues facing readers are cyber disinhibition, inadvertent self- disclosure, and cyber crimes such as bullying, doxing, phishing etc. On the consumers' end, mainly social media users, the problem of invasion of privacy is not fully understood. Readers in the online world are still unaware of the data trails they willingly give to internet service providers and are thus falling into a situation where they have no control over their data. The disclosure problem is compounded by the lack of awareness among Internet and new media users, which can lead to an invasion of privacy. Companies often dictate social networking site's terms of service and privacy policies as per their requirement, and readers have little or no say in changing them. They are also unaware of their virtual identities and how data mining firms use them. Similarly, social networking sites often collect and share information with third-party users. Still, users cannot control this since failure to accept these policies usually results in the inability to sign up or access these sites and applications. Thus, we reveal much more about ourselves online than we had planned to simply because we do not care to go through the privacy settings or disclosure agreements while downloading apps or accessing social media. The least a user can do is to read and understand these carefully and limit the amount and type of personal information they upload. The increasing cyber disinhibition, or the phenomenon of loosening social restrictions and inhibitions in the virtual world, is a major cause of ethical and legal violations. Activity - 3 Visit the Digital Citizenship website [https://www.digitalcitizenship.net] and review the nine elements of digital citizenship. These night elements require individuals to lead and assist others within one's community to become active digital citizens, recognise the positive and negative consequences of actions, and practice good habits. Cognitive justice also acknowledges the importance of representing content from minority groups, using lesser-known but valid resources and promoting indigenous knowledge. Provide examples based on your personal experience of each of the nine elements. Evaluate your competency about these elements and consider which aspects require improvement. Discuss how information and digital access influence your ability to evaluate information.
10.7.1 Ethics Related to Citizen Journalism
The access and availability of technology have led to the growth of the concept of 'citizen journalism' wherein the common person decides and presents the issues of importance and concerns. Citizen Journalism is not an entirely new concept, as it existed in some form involving ordinary people in contributing news. However, the term gained currency in 2005. The ease of dissemination of information through the web has made it extremely simple to post information on the Internet. Similarly, the accessibility of smartphones with built-in cameras and advanced features has empowered ordinary

MIL, Society and Ethics citizens to write, post, and publish material. It is democratic and participatory and can use various media forms as empowering tools. The CJs, as they are popularly called, are not regular employees of a media organisation and may not be professionally trained journalists. Over time, some confusion has also emerged about who a citizen journalist is. Do bloggers, stringers, or those engaged in user-generated content (UGC) also fall into this category? It is important to distinguish as the content they posted could be more of an opinion or comment than hard news. Since they do not possess conventional training in journalism, they may not have the necessary skills in research and cross-checking facts. The processes related to gate-keeping, filtering, agenda-setting and ensuring information integrity are some issues in citizen journalism.
10.7.2 Instances of Ethical Violations
New media is a powerful tool to reach out to people, but it is sometimes misused for personal attacks and running malicious campaigns with intended or unintended consequences. Trolling, cyber vandalism and smear campaigns are mounted on the Internet to garner quick support. Sometimes, these incidents go out of hand and create gross ethical and legal violations. For example, the pictures of the brutal murder of a northeastern student in the Munirka area of Delhi were shared online without respect for the individual's privacy or his family's consent. Similarly, leaked pictures of film stars holidaying abroad caused a lot of annoyance to the people concerned. In the above cases, we can hold the person who circulated the pictures legally guilty. Still, people who came across the pictures and shared them further indulged in gross ethical violations. In case any content being circulated on the net is found to be objectionable, it must be reported to the particular site and the authorities so that necessary action may be taken. Another ethical violation is the trend of shaming videos. These are videos where people are humiliated with punishments such as chopping off their hair, beating, etc., and are recorded to be uploaded online to promote online embarrassment. There have been reports of kids, teenagers and even adults feeling suicidal after their shaming videos came online. This disturbing trend also includes videos of pet shaming. Though they are intended to serve as a punishment, such videos often go 'viral' and can affect the mental and social health of the persons concerned. People of all age groups use the Internet, and not all users are discerning enough to understand the consequences of the data they may end up sharing online. Anything once posted on the Internet remains there forever and can be dug up any time later and cause embarrassment. Therefore, we must be extra careful in putting up or sharing our pictures with friends and colleagues. We often find abusive and derogatory language in web page comment sections, chat rooms, social networking sites, etc. This trolling is a result of disinhibition or the breaking down of socio-cultural norms in the virtual world. Another significant threat is an addiction to these sites. The overuse of apps and social networking sites is causing an alarming situation where addicted users are psychologically more dependent on their virtual identities than on real-world scenarios. The ubiquitous 'selfie' also becomes a menace at times. Clicking a selfie at any minute of the day is not a crime. However, how, where

and when it is clicked decides whether there has been an ethical violation. Former US Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
President Barack Obama faced a lot of flak for clicking a selfie at the funeral of Nelson Mandela. As we look at the advent of the 'Internet of Things, i.e., devices connected with the Internet that can be remotely operated, the responsibility of using the technology better has also increased manifold.
10.7.3 Do's and Don't's of Ethical Violations
The guidelines for 'netiquette' are very simple. When we post something in relation to a text, we should point to the original text while commenting so that our post is not taken out of context. We must be careful while posting any data online, and before doing so, one must consider the long-term consequences. We should be sensitive to online readers who may represent different beliefs, sensibilities and cultures. If we have made a mistake, we must immediately apologise and remove the concerned posted text. We should be gracious in disagreements, too. Expressing any negative opinion online on a public forum can be disturbing for any individual. Below is a list of ways to prevent unethical online practices.
Do's and dont's of New Media Ethics
"Do not open messages from strangers Do not forward messages/rumours without first verifying the claims Do not impersonate individuals or secure their passwords through unauthorised means Never send pictures to strangers Avoid downloading copies of pirated software or movies, songs, etc. Respect the privacy of others, just as you expect the same from others. Do not use other users' computer resources without their permission. Use the Internet ethically. If found, complain about illegal communication and activities to Internet Service Providers and local law enforcement authorities. Users should not intentionally use the computers to retrieve or modify the information of others, which may include password information, files, etc." Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Why is social media policy important in the present context?

2. What can readers do to safeguard their online experience?

183

MIL, Society and Ethics 3. How can online ethical violations be prevented?

10.8 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) With a glimpse of the code of ethics and conduct in this unit, the learner should be able to discuss indexes such as the Freedom of the Press Index of Freedom House, the Worldwide Press Freedom Index of Reporters without Borders, or a relevant regional measure, such as the media Afrobarometer. The learner can:
1. explain whether they think such indexes are relevant or useful to development;
2. identify and explain the factors or variables that have affected the freedom of
the press. Criteria covered in this indices include the following: Degree of freedom of print, broadcast and online media The legal environment for media Political pressures that influence reporting Economic factors that affect access to information Media ownership concentration Direct attacks on journalists and media The existence of state monopoly in media The existence of censorship and self-censorship in media Difficulties for foreign reporters How do digital communications companies curate news media content compared to other countries (e.g., e-personal content, entertainment, etc.)? Learners can also collate examples of reporting that depict prejudices, including stereotyping, mythmaking, obscenity and graphic images. Participants should be led through a discussion on the importance of standards and general guidelines for journalists. Lastly, educators can guide learners in making an inventory of the coverage by citizen reporting of an event or issue prominently covered by mainstream media. They can then check for factual errors or bias.
10.9 LET US SUM UP
The debate surrounding ethical issues in media has increased prominence in the last few decades, and the issue is being hotly debated at various levels and fora. In this Unit, we discussed that ethics imply the freedom to choose; hence, a firm grounding in ethics will help you understand various critical issues in your profession and follow the correct path. Ethics form the bedrock of the key processes of journalism - identifying information, gathering, selecting and presenting the information. In this way, ethics ensure

the reliability of the information on which the credibility of a media organisation depends. Freedom, Ethics and
Social Accountability
Because of the complexities in the present media scenario, the ethical dimension of each area needs to be thoroughly examined. The exposure and guidance thus gained will help you to make responsible decisions in different capacities in your work. As a new generation of media professionals, you must critically understand your role in a highly competitive and profit-driven media environment and act as harbingers of change for the well-being of society and the profession. Furthermore, learning to differentiate between 'open' and 'free' content is an important aspect of understanding online ethics and using web content. These were discussed in detail, along with some instances of ethical violations and how these can be handled effectively.
10.10 KEYWORDS
Code : Code is a systematic set of guidelines or framework for standard moral behaviour - it is an index of what is generally considered desirable. Law : It is a set of rules established in a social system that demand or prohibit specific actions. Ethics : Ethics provide a media person with certain fundamental principles or standards by which s/he can judge an action as right or wrong, good or bad, responsible or irresponsible.
10.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Basu, D. D. (2013), Introduction to the Constitution of India. Prentice Hall
2. Ferre John P. A Short History of Media Ethics in Lee Wilkins, Clifford
G. Christians (Eds.) (2009), The Handbook of Mass Media Ethics, Routledge,
New York & London
3. Iyer V. (2002), (Ed.), Media Ethics in Asia: Addressing the Dilemmas in the
Information Age, AMIC/SCI-NTU, Singapore
4. Keeble, Richard (2009), Ethics for Journalists, Routledge, London, New York
5. M Neelamalar; 2nd ed. (2009), Media law and Ethics, Prentice Hall India Learning
Private Ltd.
6. Pathak, J. (2014). Introduction to Media Laws and Ethics, Shipra Publication,
Delhi
7. Retief J. (2009), Media Ethics: An Introduction to Responsible Journalism, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, New York
8. Thakurta, Paranjoy Guha (2012), Media Ethics, Truth Fairness and Objectivity,
Oxford University Press, New Delhi
10.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. A professional media needs to develop a strong ethical sense and value system

MIL, Society and Ethics so that s/he can make correct choices to face the complexities and challenges of the real world in his/her professional life.
2. The Canons of Journalism stand for responsibility, freedom, independence,
honesty, accuracy, impartiality, fair play and decency in journalism.
3. Codes of ethics aim to develop a responsible attitude among media
professionals toward their work and flag the problem areas that need to be anticipated and avoided in discharging their duties. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The essential ethical values needed in a media professional are accuracy,
objectivity, and privacy.
2. According to Whitehouse (2009), if one segment of society is ignored, vilified
or even inappropriately sanctified through mass media narratives, those marginalised and the community as a whole will be harmed. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Social media is designed to be an easy-to-use system for voicing our opinions.
But there is a need to be aware of the new dangers it exposes us to. Social media policies define the limits of actions that can be performed on social media and thus help us follow responsible online behaviour - both as content producers and users.
2. Social networking sites often collect information and share it with third-party
users. Although users cannot control this, it is prudent that they go through the privacy settings or disclosure agreements while downloading apps or accessing social media. The user should read and understand these carefully and limit the amount and type of personal information they upload.
3. We should double-check the data we post online and be critical, observant
and watchful while sharing content or talking to strangers. We should also encourage our acquaintances and friends to point out any inadvertent errors or mistakes we have committed.

Block-3
Journalism and Society

BLOCK 3: JOURNALISM AND SOCIETY
Media plays a crucial role as a fourth pillar in a democracy. This role brings a considerable responsibility for the news organisations to support the democratic processes. Watchdog and gatekeeping are considered the significant roles news outlets perform objectively to strengthen the performance of various public institutions and bring transparency in decision-making. You can understand the importance of news organisations' role in society through these roles. Media is considered a powerful institution; it is prone to influence by the various power centres besides its commercial operations. Bias, subjectivity, hidden agendas, and favouritism are some significant criticisms. Regular news readers should be familiar with the entire news operation. This block will take you through the nuances of news operations.
Unit 11: What Makes News?
News is essential information that is deemed timely, significant, and relevant to a particular audience. It informs, educates, and engages the public in current events and issues. Specific criteria are applied to determine what qualifies as news, including novelty, impact, proximity, prominence, and human interest. Facts and verification are paramount in news reporting, maintaining objectivity and non-partisanship. However, limitations, such as time constraints, editing differences, and varying mediums, impact the news- making process. Additionally, the rapid pace of news production in the digital age has raised questions about accuracy and verification. The constant assessment of news involves evaluating its "news factor," considering its impact, significance, and relevance to the audience. Shaping news requires thoughtful consideration of how the information is presented, ensuring accuracy and objectivity. In this unit, we delve into the concepts, criteria, and challenges that underpin the news- making process, shedding light on how information becomes news in a dynamic and evolving media landscape.
Unit 12: The News Development Process
The process of news-making is a complex and dynamic journey that involves identifying news, recognising compelling stories, and bringing them to the public in various forms of media. It comprises a series of stages, from pre-production research to post- production editing and dissemination. Key players in this process include journalists, editors, photographers, videographers, and producers who collaborate to ensure accurate and engaging news content. Each media platform, whether TV, radio, print, or digital, has unique production methods and challenges. News production has become more immediate and interactive in this digital age, allowing for real-time updates and audience engagement. However, this fast-paced environment also raises concerns about accuracy and the spread of misinformation. Quality control and review are critical steps in news-making, where editorial standards are upheld, and stories are fact-checked and verified. This unit helps you explore the intricate world of news production, exploring its stages, key players, and the evolving landscape in various media formats.
Unit 13: News Reporting and The Power of The Image
News reporting has transformed in the digital age, distinguishing between traditional and new media platforms. Irrespective of the platform, adherence to good reporting

Journalism and Society practices remains paramount, involving accuracy, impartiality, and ethical considerations. One of the most potent tools in news reporting is the power of images. Visual storytelling can convey emotions, provide context, and enhance the impact of a news story. Images can capture the essence of an event or issue in a way that words alone often cannot. Learning the attributes of news reporting involves honing skills in writing, interviewing, fact-checking, and understanding ethical responsibilities. It also entails adapting to the evolving landscape of new media, where information is disseminated rapidly and interactively. This unit explores the news reporting process and images' influential role, emphasising the importance of ethical practices and evolving skills in journalism. After completing these units, the next time you read or watch any news, you should be able to decipher all the meanings of given news presentations. More importantly, based on this critical understanding, you should be able to make informed decisions for your personal and professional circumstances.

What Makes News
UNIT 11 WHAT MAKES NEWS?
Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 What is News: Concept and Definition
11.3 Criteria for Information to Become News
11.3.1 News Factor as a Constant for Assessment of News
11.3.2 Considerations While Shaping News
11.3.3 Thoughts on Making a Judgement About News
11.4 The five W's and one H's of Newsgathering
11.4.1 News Value and Its Important Attributes
11.4.2 Facts and Verifications
11.4.3 Objectivity and Non-Partisanship
11.5 Limitations in the News Making Process
11.5.1 Inherent Restrictions of Time and Money
11.5.2 Difference in Editing and Reporting
11.5.3 Differences in Medium
11.5.4 Importance of News in Our Life
11.6 Pedagogical Approaches
11.7 Let Us Sum Up
11.8 Keywords
11.9 Further Readings
11.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
11.0 INTRODUCTION
In the previous units of this course, we have discussed media and information literacy, communication and information, technology, media and society. Based on the topics discussed, we would like to progress to the most important subject of news and its making. Nevertheless, before we start discussing this topic, we must pay a short visit to this subject and its relevance in today's time when there is an overdose of every piece of information coming our way, courtesy - new media and its various subsidiaries that also constitutes the vast landscape of social media. Before revisiting some famous and frequently used news descriptions worldwide, let us take this opportunity to share our understanding of news in the traditional sense. In this age of news being treated more like a commodity than a service, one can easily assume it to be something associated with the business of selling information. However- while taking a deeper dive to understand its importance and gradual inroads in our daily lives, we can describe News as the constant on which modern human settlement has survived and thrived for decades. We can also say that the survival and evolution of modern human settlement and innumerable socio-cultural practices across the globe would not have been possible without the contribution of news in our day-to-day lives.

Journalism and Society In this unit, we will try to understand the concept of news in one of the most accessible and comprehensible manners; let us start this process with the most used definition of News. According to a popular theory, the letters in the word "NEWS" come from the four directions listed below: North, East, West and South. This illustrates how news can originate from anywhere. News is information on recent events occurring, as well as a report on a current event that was previously unknown. Another famous phrase concerning the news given by New York Sun Editor John B Bogart between (1841 and 1921), was, "When a dog bites a man, that is not news because it happens so often. However, if a man bites a dog, that is news." The quote is also attributed to Charles Anderson Dana (1819-1897). 1 This could be partially true in some sense, but then, let us think of the recent incident where a pet Pitbull dog had mauled its owner, an older woman, in her own house, and she died on the spot of the injuries. This was an incident covered extensively by every media, and it raised concerns among the general people and the news value of the incident.2 This illustrates how news can originate from anywhere. It is a report on a recent incident that was not previously known or information or knowledge on current incidents and occurrences in our surroundings. However, though what John Bogart had said about news a century ago was true, in the same way, we could also say that an incident like a dog biting a woman/man also makes news vis-a-vis the above-cited incident from Lucknow. Thus making it more pertinent for everyone, especially teachers and educators, to revisit and understand the evolving concept of news.
11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: define News; describe the process of making news; explain the core concepts of news making; identify the do's and don'ts of news making; state the five W's and one 'H' of the news; and critically analyse the role of news in our lives.
11.2 WHAT IS NEWS: CONCEPT AND DEFINITION
Information about current affairs is known as news. Word-of-mouth, printing, postal services, broadcasting, technological communication, or the testimonies of observers and witnesses to events are just a few of the various mediums that may be used to provide this information. To distinguish news from soft media, some people use the 1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Man_bites_dog 2 https://www.indiatoday.in/newsmo/video/lucknow-woman-mauled-to-death-by-her-pet-pitbull- 192 dog-1975667-2022-07-14

term "hard news". As a unique use of the plural "new" form, the English term "news" What Makes News emerged in the 14th century. Like the French Nouvelles and the German Neues, the Middle English corresponding term was news. "News," as its name suggests, often refers to disseminating brand-new information.3 News differs from the more meticulous studies of history or other scholarly fields because it is fresh and unpredictable.4 Even though the most crucial details of a news story have already happened or are anticipated to happen in the future, news prominently portrays the world in the present or recent past.5 The definition of news is allegedly elusive. However, the news will always be something that readers, listeners, and viewers find surprising and hard to believe. However, here are some of its definitions: When a dog bites a man, that is not news, but when a man bites a dog, that is news. (Charles Anderson Dana, American journalist, 1819-1897) News is what somebody somewhere wants to suppress; all the rest is advertising. (Lord Northcliffe, British publisher 1865-1922) Well, the news is anything interesting that relates to what is happening in the world and what is happening in the culture that interests your audience. (Kurt Loder, American journalist, b. 1945) What you see is news, what you know is background, and what you feel is opinion. (Lester Markel, American journalist, 1894-1977) It is hardly news that catches readers. Features hold them. (Lord Northcliffe, British publisher 1865-1922) To a journalist, the good news is often not news at all. (Phil Donahue, American entertainer, b. 1935) No news is good news. (Ludovic Halevy, French author, 1834-1908) [News is] a first rough draft of history. (Philip L. Graham, American publisher, 1915-1963) For most folks, no news is good news; for the press, the good news is not news. (Gloria Borger, American journalist, b. 1952) The real news is bad. (Marshall McLuhan, Canadian communications theorist, 1911-1980) It would help if you now better understood the broad definitions of news provided above. However, it might be challenging to define "news" precisely. Any information must be truthful, novel, and engaging to be properly called "news." Reporting on facts is necessary since news is impossible without them. The reader, listener, audience or spectator must learn these things for the first time to accept it as news. The definition of news has been repeated more than often: it is information published in newspapers and magazines' news sections, aired on radio and televised by television networks, or made available online and nowadays also shared on Social Media. News also covers
3 Stephens, History of News (1988), p. 13.4 Smith, The Newspaper: An International History (1979)
5 Park, "News as a Form of Knowledge" (1940), pp. 675-676.193

Journalism and Society the personal affairs, relationships, and scandals of the well-known, wealthy, and infamous. The communication networks that convey the news have always been connected to how quickly it spreads. This also means that the speed at which a piece of news spreads directly relates to that area's network system. As a result, the routes via which news may spread or expand have traditionally been controlled, extended, and regulated by governmental, religious, and commercial interests. Maintaining political influence over a sizable region has been tightly linked to that area's postal or communication services for a very long time.6 7 Even when we consider the future of journalism in the digital era, the deceptively fundamental question "What is news?" still holds. Asked how they define news, journalists sometimes reply: "I know it when I see it." Pressed on why something has been deemed newsworthy, a typical response is: "Because it just is!" (Brighton & Foy, 2007, p. 147).8 Nevertheless, as journalists and citizens expected to be media literate in modern times, we must test our understanding and acceptance of any information as news. For this, you need to develop an understanding of news through a rigorous and consistent study of news as a subject flowing in our surroundings. To test the understanding of News, Harcup and O'Neil decided to revisit one of the most read and cited seminal academic works of Galtung and Ruge's "What is news? Galtung and Ruge revisited" (Harcup & O'Neill, 2001).9 Furthermore- this created a chord between their understanding of News vis-a-vis what was discussed in this research article. So, now I would like to list those points here for you to have a better and more precise understanding of the News. You can go through these summarised points below.
1. The power elite: Narratives about influential people, groups, or organisations.
2. Celebrity: Information about persons who are already well-known.
3. Entertainment: Stories that feature sex, the entertainment industry, human
interest, animals, a developing drama, or that provide the potential for hilarious treatment, amusing images, or clever headlines.
4. Surprise: Narratives that have a surprise or contrast aspect.
5. Stories with dark undertones, like war or tragedy, are bad news.
6. Good news: Narratives have exceptionally upbeat undertones, such as rescues
and cures.
7. Relevance: Stories about topics, people, or countries the audience considers
relevant.
8. Follow-up: Articles regarding newsworthy topics.
9. News agenda: Articles that follow or complement the news organisation's
The summary shared above clarifies the standard concept and idea of News practised and followed everywhere in the world. Newsrooms could be different, and so could
6 Fang, History of Mass Communication (1997), pp. 14-15.7 Stephens, History of News (1988), p. 27
8 Brighton, P., & Dennis Foy. (2007). News Values. London: Sage. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
9 Harcup, T., & Deirdre O'Neill. (2001). "What is News? Galtung and Ruge Revisited." Journalism
194 Studies 2 (2): 261-280. DOI: 10.1080/14616700118449, [Google Scholar]

be their standard mode of operations, but certain elements hold ground in every What Makes News newsroom while dealing with news, which has been discussed for all of you.
11.3 CRITERIA FOR INFORMATION TO BECOME
NEWS
What qualifies as news in terms of information? What factors may be considered when choosing what information to report as news?
1. Timeliness: Newsworthy information and events are immediate and recent
since they have just happened or taken place/occurred. Because it is something that is 'new', it is newsworthy.
2. Closeness: Incidents that occur near our surroundings or in proximity are
news because they impact the people living in our neighbourhood and nearby areas; local information and events are always noteworthy to people residing in and around that area, compared to those that happen far away. For example, an earthquake in Delhi will generate more interest and curiosity among the people living in and around the national capital than in Indonesia or Dubai.
3. Impact: The number of people impacted by the narrative is very significant,
as that signifies the importance of news. For example - The death of millions of people in the COVID-19 pandemic worldwide harmed humankind.
4. Prominence: Under their fame, renowned persons receive greater media
attention, and thus, they play an essential part in newsmaking. For example - the death of actors Sushant Singh Rajput and Irrfan Khan.
5. Weird: Anything that can shock the audience will have a news value. The
bizarre creates an audience. For example, There was a nude photoshoot by actor Ranveer Singh.
6. Conflict: Fighting is an essential part of our lives. We naturally seek out
confrontation now and then because conflict validates us. For example-- elections, the Russia-Ukraine war, etc. A battle is always easy to cover, and we also get compelled to predict the winner in every case.
7. Human Interest: One of the most inclusive categories -- and one of my
favourites -- is this. These tales reveal something about the state of the human race, from rags to riches tales, experience pieces, something extraordinary that defies the existing boundary of our day-to-day life and its struggle. These stories of grit, grandeur, willpower, love and humanity can evoke powerful feelings in us. They make us grin, cry, be happy, laugh, and find meaning in our lives.
11.3.1 News Factor as a Constant for Assessment of News
Conceptually, news factors are assumed to be a text's qualities rather than an event's inherent characteristics. The media apply them to heighten the legitimacy of an event becoming news (Bednarek & Caple, 2014). They are factors that affect the newsworthiness quality of any information made public for the consumption of the general audience. In other words, we can say that News

Journalism and Society elements are technical and editorial finesse employed by the media to increase the validity of an event becoming news; conceptually, they are thought of as features of a text or visuals or treatment of the content rather than the intrinsic attributes of an event itself. A manual examination of news stories from print, web, and television shows that the length of a story and its chance of making the front page or serving as the first item on a newscast positively correlates with the overall number of new components in that story. According to Cotter (2010),10 News elements are considered "from the beginning to the conclusion of the reporting and editing process" (p. 74). As a result, they affect both the selection of news and the choice of how well-known a story should be. After all, prominence indicates how much weight journalists and/or editors have given anything (newsworthiness, Schulz,1982) 11 From the functional viewpoint, an event is not inherently noteworthy; instead, it is given that status by attributing or adding news characteristics through language, image, and typography to present it as news to an audience. The media employ news elements to increase the validity of an event or information becoming news. They are conceptually understood to be text qualities rather than the event's intrinsic traits. However, contrary to this - under the causal model, news factors are inherent qualities of a story that determine the treatment journalists give to the story in the newsroom. However, in both models, a story is assumed to be more newsworthy when it has more news components. Moreover, there is a greater possibility that the event will be covered extensively by notable media. Figure 1: Information characteristics that affect the news judgement of journalists (Elder, 2006) Elders (2006) 12 discovered seven news characteristics that consistently affect journalists' assessments of any information's newsworthiness, namely -- negativity (damage; the bad elements of an event or issue), continuity (frequency; having been in the news previously), proximity (cultural, geographical, and/or economic "nearness"), eliteness (presence of persons, organisations, or nations of elite rank participating in an event), impact and relevance (the significance and consequence/influence of an event in terms of current events).
10 Cotter, C (2010). News Talk: Investigating the Language of Journalism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
11 Schulz, W. (1982). News Structure and People's Awareness of Political Events. Gazette (Leiden,
Netherlands), 30(3), 139-153. DOI: 10.1177/001654928203000301
12 Elders, C. (2006). News factors and news decisions. Theoretical and methodological advances
196 in Germany. Communications, 31(1). DOI: 10.1515/commun.2006.002

11.3.2 Considerations While Shaping News What Makes News
News is information on recent happenings. This can be communicated in various ways, including oral communication, writing, mailing, broadcasting, technological communication, or the testimonies of observers and witnesses to the occurrences. The news is occasionally called "hard news " to distinguish it from soft media." However - making and shaping news content involves some essential and significant considerations. Let us have a brief familiarity with them. Truth and Accuracy -- Even if journalists cannot always guarantee "truth," getting the facts correctly is the fundamental tenet of journalism. Along with: Independence -- Journalists must be unbiased; They should not speak up for particular political, business, or cultural interests in any official or informal capacity. Fairness and Impartiality -- Most stories have two or more sides to them. While it is not required to include all perspectives in every piece, stories should be fair and provide background information. Although objectivity is not always feasible or desirable (in the face of, for instance, cruelty or inhumanity), unbiased reporting fosters confidence. Humanity -- Journalists need to act responsibly. Even when the information they print or broadcast may be harmful, they must be mindful that their actions and words can affect other people's lives. Accountability -- The capacity for self-restraint is the hallmark of professionalism and ethical journalism. When journalists make mistakes, they need to fix them and show genuine and not fake regret. They needed to listen to what our audiences had to say. They may not be able to change the opinions or writings of their readers or viewers, but they can always give a patient hearing to their grievances and provide solutions if they find their actions wrong.
11.3.3 Thoughts on Making a Judgment About News
What is a good news judgment? Or what is that judgement which brings out the good news to the fore? As a process, news judgment involves making wise decisions, conducting thorough research, communicating, and meaningfully sharing and displaying information. It lies in the undefined intersection of moral insight, well-honed intuition, and ethical reasoning. When searching for a good story or project, many weak signals are available during the news-collecting process. Finding the mega stories -- the powerful signals -- and searching for threads within them has proven to be the most effective approach to judging the news. I am telling this with my experience of two decades in the newsroom. Focusing on the news peg of the day or moment is one of the most used and successful patterns in an excellent news judgment. Although it is a perfect spot, the newsroom's perspective often restricts journalists' efforts. Therefore, it becomes essential for them to use their judgement to broaden their perspective and explain to readers a point that cannot be adequately expressed to people easily. However - there are nine elements on which news judgments should be made, and they are as follows: Timeliness/Relevance Proximity

Journalism and Society Impact/Consequence
Prominence Conflict Human interest Currency Extremes/Superlatives Novelty. Activity - 1 Take a list of 15-20 headlines, then ask yourself the following: What are the important stories? If you have space/airtime for only five, which ones would you choose? Please give reasons for your selection. If you are from (a) a TV news channel, (b) a broadsheet, (c) a tabloid, (d) a radio news program, or (e) an international news agency, which stories would you choose? Pick only five. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is news?

2. What factors may be considered when choosing what information to report as
news?

3. What are the considerations while shaping news?

11.4 THE FIVE W'S AND ONE H'S OF NEWS
GATHERING
The Five Ws, Five Ws and one H, or Six Ws, are inquiries whose responses are seen as fundamental in acquiring information. They include Who, What, When, Where, and Why. The five Ws are frequently referred to in journalism (see news style), research, and police investigations. They make up a method for discovering all the facts about a

subject. According to the Five W's concept, a report is only deemed complete if it What Makes News responds to the following queries beginning with an interrogative word: It is about whom? What happened? When did it happen? Where did it happen? What caused it, and why? A good news story should always have clear information regarding the who, what, when, where, and why. Some authors would include a sixth question, too: "How," even though "How" can also be answered by the answers to the previous four questions. For example- How did it take place? Here, we must remember that each query must have a factual response; these facts must be present for the report to be accurate and complete. It is worth noting that none of these queries can be answered with "yes" or "no." It has to have a reason behind it.
11.4.1 News Value and Its Important Attributes
What are news values, and how significant are they? Every phase of the news process involves the conscious or unconscious use of news values, which guides decision-making. News values, or the characteristics that constitute a news article "newsworthy," are ingrained in texts and guide behaviour. News values "shape texts" because they limit the range of possibilities by offering decision-making criteria. A group of specific criteria, or "news values," that includes proximity, impact, change, prominence, conflict, timeliness, utility, and the unexpected, are used to judge newsworthiness. At every stage of the news process, consciously or unconsciously, news values guide decision- making. One of the most significant practice-based and ideological variables in determining the subject and format of news articles, as well as the choices made by journalists, is the news value of the news item. News value is important because it propagates the whole idea of newsworthiness. A few of the guiding elements that decide whether a story is newsworthy or not are listed below: These elements decide whether a story is newsworthy: impact, currency, prominence, closeness, weirdness, conflict, significance and human interest. Understanding this list of news values can help you land those important news placements. Activity - 2 Identify the value-driving news. Focus on the following questions: Identify the lead article or main headline story of a particular issue of a print or online news platform Identify the news values that have driven the article. Explain how you identified each.

Journalism and Society
Are there multiple values? Does the presence of more drivers make the story more important or more interesting? Analyse the newsworthiness of the article. Do you think it should have been published? Why or why not?
11.4.2 Facts and Verifications
What are facts, and what is verification of news? A fact is said to have occurred or is believed to be true. However, before presenting claims as facts, you must determine their credibility as a journalist. This affects how you convey things to your readers or listeners. You will encounter three types of facts in your work as a journalist. Some facts have been demonstrated to be real, truths that are likely to be assumed as accurate despite the lack of proof, and things that may be true yet seem false. So, to get clarity in such a situation, a journalist typically uses his verification skills. "Verification is the editorial technique used by journalists -- including fact-checkers -- to verify the accuracy of a statement," says Bill Adair, the founder of PolitiFact and currently the Knight Professor of the Practice of Journalism Public Policy at Duke University.13 At the core of journalism is the discipline of verification, which is also being used by other professions. In journalism, fact-checking is a particular use or part of verification applied while verifying any fact. Adair points out that verification is a crucial activity that makes fact- checking possible. In their book, "The Elements of Journalism", Tom Rosenstiel and Bill Kovach write, "The essence of journalism is a discipline of verification." That discipline is "a scientific- like approach to getting the facts and the right facts."14 This is a helpful explanation of what verification is. Additionally, it also assists in describing the methodology used by fact-checkers to do their task. You must engage in verification exercises to be a fact-checker. However, many people who are not fact- checkers or journalists engage in verification. Thanks to the growth of social media and user-generated material, the importance of verification has returned to the forefront of journalism and assumed a new urgency for civil groups like human rights activists and law enforcement bodies. What is the importance of verification? The whole process of verification is important not only for the journalist or the news outlet but also for the audience because he/she is then able to evaluate the veracity of the information, the method by which the information was obtained, and the motivations and prejudices of the journalist who provided it. Transparency in the whole process 13 https://datajournalism.com/read/handbook/verification-1/additional-materials/verification-and- fact-checking
14 Kovach, B., & Rosenstiel, T. (2021). The Elements of Journalism, Revised and Updated 4th
Edition: What Newspeople Should Know, and the Public Should Expect. Crown Publishing
200 Group (NY).

shows the viewers that the journalist respects their audience and does not take them What Makes News for granted. Transparency is, therefore, the strongest defence against mistakes if, unfortunately, source deceit takes place. In order to construct a brand, verification is crucial for journalists since it brings in the reader's confidence. If there is inaccuracy or disinformation, a journalist's ideal course of action is to fix their error swiftly with proper facts. This will increase the reader's confidence in him/her, demonstrating the journalist's dedication while disseminating information. Being the first to break the news is less essential than getting it right. Thus, journalists should put more significant pressure on themselves to get it right than to break it first. Activity - 3 The learners can access a series of news items from digital communications companies and conduct exercises on the following: How to tell if the news is from a trusted source? What are trusted sources of news? Why are they trusted? Is the news real or fabricated but disguised in the genre of news? How can you tell? Do social media platforms benefit from false information? What about search engines? To what extent should digital communications companies be responsible for managing false information on their platforms?
11.4.3 Objectivity and Non-Partisanship
Journalistic objectivity is at the forefront when we talk about key ideas related to professionalism in a journalistic career. Fairness, objectivity, factuality, and non- partisanship are all possible definitions of journalistic objectivity. It has been customary and practice for years to report with less responsibility and credit a spokesperson, the media, or other sources for the information circulated. Media outlets refrain from forming opinions, stay clear of uncertainty, and avoid making overtly biased judgments. The intellectual foundation of every journalistic endeavour is objectivity or generally accepted neutrality. According to Social Scientist Michael Schudson, "the belief in objectivity is a faith in 'facts,' a distrust in 'values,' and a commitment to their segregation".15 Objectivity also outlines an institutional role for journalists as a fourth estate, a body that exists apart from the government and large interest groups.16 These five terms -- neutral, disinterested, nonpartisan, impartial and independent -- are perhaps not exact synonyms, but they come close to describing objectivity. We can picture these phrases being incorporated into the wall of a journalism institute of the bygone era. The ability to remain impartial, just, and unaffected by one's feelings, prejudices, or preferences is
15 Carey, J. (1982). The Discovery of ObjectivityDiscovering the News: A Social History of
American Newspapers.Michael Schudson. American Journal of Sociology, 87(5), 1182-1188.
DOI: 10.1086/227565
16 Carey, J. (1982). The Discovery of ObjectivityDiscovering the News: A Social History of
American Newspapers.Michael Schudson. American Journal of Sociology, 87(5), 1182-1188.
DOI: 10.1086/227565 201

Journalism and Society known as objectivity. It prevents social scientists, journalists and professionals in the public domain from interfering with or tampering with the data collecting and processing processes. For example - Suppose you are a practising journalist, and there is an election in your constituency; you can motivate people in your area to go to the polling booth and cast their vote, but you cannot ask them to vote for any particular candidate. You can demonstrate objectivity in three basic ways: By being emotionless and showing no signs of being upset or anxious. Looking at things as they are rather than from a personal point of view. Being impartial and cognizant of both sides of perspectives. Much like objectivity, nonpartisanship is the other important side of the coin in making news. Nonpartisan refers to something neither biased nor affiliated with any political party or power centre. It also means that one is neither backed nor governed by any political party or a particular interest group. It could be expressed as untouched, uninvolved, uninfluenced, unprejudiced and unimplicated by any interest group. The nonpartisan approach of journalism is based on the convention that politics should be covered as though both parties are equally responsible for all transgressions. No one should be exempt from criticism and calling them out unequivocally. Tata Tea and Janaagraha in India launched the nonpartisan 'Jaago Re One Billion Votes' campaign to motivate people to cast their votes 2009 general election. Anal Saha was the campaign's founder, and it was a nonpartisan effort.17 Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the 5Ws and 1Hs in the news-gathering process?

2. What is verification of news?

3. What is journalistic objectivity?

11.5 LIMITATIONS IN THE NEWS MAKING PROCESS
The newsmaking process occurs in the newsroom of a news media institution, home to many other players in the news industry. Namely, the marketing, advertising, monitoring, 202 17 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonpartisanism

and editorial teams. Thus- the news media could be seen as an institution with a process What Makes News that offers a useful framework for examining news information more carefully. News information comes in numerous forms and is influenced by various factors. Various stakeholders handle information before it reaches the media, and many of them are motivated more by political, professional, or financial interests than by the event's objective journalistic value. Such material is transferred via editorial channels controlled by several "gatekeepers" inside media institutions before being altered, modified, or eliminated. Gatekeepers who assess the relative worth of news content are one of the several professional and peculiar influences in determining what will be produced and circulated. These inherent stakeholders, along with infrastructural factors, sometimes pose limitations to the whole newsmaking process. Some of the structural and functional limitations faced in the newsmaking process are as follows: Absence of trust transparency. Different communication philosophies. Working-place disputes. Language and cultural differences. Selective demography of news gathering. Lack of creativity. Limited lifespan of the news item, and Credibility diminished because of the misuse of the medium.
11.5.1 Inherent Restrictions of Time and Money
Television, radio, movies, newspapers, magazines, and Internet-based Websites/ portals are just a few of the various forms of mass media that make up the Indian media industry. In the late 18th century, we saw the beginning of the Indian media. In India, print media first appeared in 1780; in 1927, the first radio broadcasts were made. One of the earliest forms of media is found in India, even before the time of King Ashoka, when it is said to have existed. Today, large businesses that profit from advertising, membership fees, and selling content granted copyright dominate many media outlets. The largest newspaper market in the world, with more than 100 million copies sold each day, is found in India, which has 70,000 newspapers and more than 500 satellite channels, more than 80 of which are news broadcasters. However - the more diverse and dynamic we get in terms of media outlets, the more complicated it becomes in terms of their functioning, infrastructure and logistics. Today, any piece of obscure news or information is bound to make it to the newsroom via television, radio, print, and online. All of these work in an altogether distinct, different indigenous landscape, which means that they all have limitations in terms of money and time.18 Nevertheless, despite being different in nature and treatment, journalism as a tenet has creative limitations in all its forms and is cursed with a short life. Not forgetting is the question of 18 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_of_India

Journalism and Society credibility due to abuse of the medium. Here, I would list a few of the many limitations that each of these industries is facing in current times:
Limitations in Print/Newspapers Limitations in Television
Limited lifespan Limited shelf life of content Competing messages item Cannot provide details of news High cost of paper High production costs High Printing Cost Scarcity of skilled staff Lack of advertisements Urban centric Layoffs and shutting down of editions The huge number of advertisements
Limitations in Radio Limitations in Digital/Online
The short span of life A subsidiary of a TV channel/ newspaper Demographic ambiguity No independent chain of reporters Extensive lead time needed Fierce competition among advertisers The only sound, no visual Credibility issues Selective audience Young and urban audience Declining reach Fake news Mostly infotainment Amateur language of presentation Monetarily less profitable Undertrained workers
11.5.2 Difference in Editing and Reporting
Journalists are professionals who include editors, TV hosts, reporters, and photographers. Reporting, editing and presenting would be considered subsets of the journalism universe. Therefore, by this definition, reporting and editing are undoubtedly important components of journalism. An editor sorts through the material and makes it relevant for the audience while the reporter gathers information on the ground. Editing refers to preparing a print, broadcast, or television news report. A report is read, revised, changed, added value to, polished, enhanced and made better for publishing throughout the editing process. Editing also includes condensing. An individual who conducts all the investigation, writing, and interviewing is a reporter. Their primary duty is to locate a story and compile all the information. Both aim to provide the public with trustworthy news or information. In order to enlighten the reader, he or she compiles information about a public event and then provides it. Reporters are expected to offer unbiased analysis of stories that editors find newsworthy. Reporters are frequently given "beats" or specialised subjects, such as business, politics, economy, the environment, or education. Sometimes, journalists need to write the articles they cover. For instance, to meet the deadline for the article, occasionally, a reporter at the scene of a story would telephonically or otherwise communicate the material to another writer or editor in the newsroom. Both adhere to a defined format when creating newsworthy material.

While both writer/editor and reporter/editor write a fair amount, their daily activities What Makes News are very different. Editors oversee, examine, and rewrite the material while reporters create and gather original data. Both are crucial to producing written content to enlighten, persuade, or entertain readers. However, editors' tasks need more insight and analysis because they have to oversee the management and effective publishing of a specific work or set of works. Here is when their working methods or differences in reporting and editing becomes apparent, and despite their effort complement each other's work, it is more than not that the end product or piece of news either loses the tonality of the reporter's copy or comes out as a better and different version of what the reporter has filed. It is considered both the plus and minus-point of the whole process of news making but - cannot be avoided or bypassed.
11.5.3 Differences in Medium
Print media, broadcast media, and online news sources are the three primary categories of news media. There are three major categories into which the news media may be divided: Print (newspaper/magazine), Electronic (TV/Radio -- which includes traditional radio, telephone, and television broadcasts), and the Internet (online news portals/ websites -- digital computer-mediated communication, computer networking, and telegraphy) are the three main media at work in today's time. There are now several types of mass media, including social media platforms and streaming services. Old Media refers to the more conventional formats, including print, cinema, television, and radio, whereas New Media mainly comprises computer technology, the Internet, and smartphones.19 In mass media, A medium is a verbal or nonverbal communication tool. The word "medium" (or "media") refers to a wide range of resources and instruments that authors, speakers, and other knowledge producers utilise to create, preserve, and transmit messages. In contrast, a news channel is a channel for transmission or dissemination. The amount of information sent to the audience--readers, listeners, or viewers--directly depends on the medium through which the news is provided. Therefore, presenting the news can influence how the audience perceives the reported events. The primary purpose of media, with the aid of a suitable medium, is to send and share information. As we have all heard, the popular proverb 'medium is the message; here, I would like to emphasise that it holds for every country and each communication that is taking place across the globe through any kind of mass media that half the communication is done while choosing the platform through which communication is established with the audience. For example, we want to raise awareness about the childbearing rights of women in our country and choose Twitter and Facebook as our communication medium. In that case, we will end up creating a failed communication project. Our target audience or stakeholders, in this case, would be women from rural and poor backgrounds. With the massive digital divide discussion taking place globally- this would mean a half- hearted and thwarted mass communication effort. Could a community radio initiative have been the most effective medium for this project? If you answer yes, you understand the medium's importance in mass communication. 19 https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2000/10/31/differences-in-medium/

Journalism and Society 11.5.4 Importance of News in Our Life News is that aspect of communication that informs us about evolving events, problems, and people in the outside world. The primary purpose of news is to inform the public, even though it may also be engaging or entertaining. A civilised society needs news for various reasons, primarily to inform the public about situations that may impact them locally. You may build an open and critical mind by reading the news. Reading the news may slow down your ageing and learn something new daily. Reading the news can help you tell facts from fiction. Your creativity may improve after reading the news. In society, newspapers have a significant impact. They function as a tool for forming opinions, a platform for public discussion and debate, and a mechanism to safeguard the public and make them aware of wrongdoing (Martin & Copeland, 2003).20 The public becomes more informed thanks to the news. In India, there are two different kinds of newspapers. While some newspapers exclusively focus on local State concerns, others cover news from the whole county. News is intended to inform and enlighten readers about current affairs and happenings. They are utilised to give kids the knowledge they desire or need to know about the world around them. News outlets work hard to provide as much information as possible while publishing or broadcasting news. Suppose a journalist writes on an ongoing case. However, little information may be accessible to him at a particular moment. In this scenario, the journalist may speak with people involved in the case or attempt to gather background material to assist their audience in learning more. Politics and the political viewpoints of journalists, editors, and even magazine owners may significantly impact the reliability spectrum by influencing the tone of their stories. Whether you were requested to inform, educate, or convince, your evaluation brief will define where your work falls on the spectrum. Write with objectivity, being unbiased, and keeping your opinions out of your writing if you are writing to inform. Be careful not to fabricate or create fake news when assigned to write an article (false or misleading information presented as news). Do use a formal, professional tone while writing or producing news. The democratic promise of news must be taken seriously, and we must work to fulfil it.21 It would help if you worked to present views of democratic citizenship in more upbeat and optimistic ways. That is the only way we as a country could contribute little to making news daily. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the structural and functional limitations of the newsmaking process?

2. What is the difference between editing and reporting of news?
20 Martin, S. E., & Copeland, D. A. (2003). The function of newspapers in society: A global
perspective. Praeger.
21 Lewis, J. (2006). News and the empowerment of citizens. European Journal of Cultural Studies,
206 9(3), 303

What Makes News

11.6 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) Various pedagogical approaches are possible in the realm of this unit. However, most of the pedagogical approaches here are application-based in nature.
I. The first pedagogical approach can be undertaken by conducting a textual
analysis. Here, the educators analyse the newsworthiness of each of the front- page stories of a major newspaper (or its online edition) based on the criteria for assessing the news value of a story. This typically includes such factors as: Timeliness Impact and importance Prominence Proximity Conflict
Human Interest
Necessity Unusualness/Oddity Besides these normative attributes, news is often selected for its dramatic and even entertainment value. It is also chosen based on implicit ideas about what is 'important for whom' and what is the likely 'impact on whom'. They then analyse the stories based on the factors to consider in making news judgments or shaping the news. These are: Truthfulness: accuracy (getting the facts right) and coherence (making sense of the facts) Dedication to the public interest Informing, rather than manipulating, the public Completeness/comprehensiveness Diversity (inclusion of news of all communities, not just targeted audiences) These normative factors can be seen in the extent to which news items identify their sources, reveal verification used (e.g., triangulation of sources), and transparency of journalists' views that affect what they do- such as to what facts and voices are most salient for them, and why. Attention should also be paid to the placement of articles, headlines, font size, photographs, and captions. II. The second pedagogical approach for this unit can be undertaken by learners in the form of a contextual analysis. Here, the educator reviews the coverage of a media organisation of choice/relevance on a particular topic and particular day and compares and contrasts the angling (i.e., selling of a particular point of view or

Journalism and Society perspective) and treatment (i.e., information performed, sources acknowledged, interviews done, any visual support of news stories) of at least two broadcasters' coverages.
11.7 LET US SUM UP
During this unit, you were allowed to examine how news is produced in India and internationally. News is a fabricated phenomenon that is generated to influence us in various ways. It was emphasised that because we live in a mediated environment, we need to learn more about media and educate ourselves on how these messages in the form of news are produced and distributed. This unit covered the necessity, goal, and process of news production. It was mentioned that news creation is a form of education that cultivates critical thinking, competence, and literacy among a wide range of audiences from various socioeconomic classes, age groups, and societal backgrounds, empowering them to become active members of their nation. To assist you in assessing the reliability of information from various sources, the three Indian media outlets were looked at. It also explained how to dissect a media message from the standpoint of the platform. There was a description of the distinctions between media, medium, and messages and instructions on interpreting these differences and deciphering the messages sent by various media tools. The conversation will help you find your way through the newsmaking process in diverse newsroom messaging and acquire information from various sources. After studying this chapter, you can assess the media's implicit and explicit messages with your interpretations. You can investigate how news items are formed and generated in various media platforms (print, verbal, visual, or multimedia).
11.8 KEYWORDS
News : News refers to disseminating brand-new information News factor : They are factors that affect the newsworthiness quality of any information made public for the consumption of the general audience News judgment: News judgment, as a process, involves making wise decisions, conducting thorough research, communicating, and meaningfully sharing and displaying information. News value : News values are the characteristics that constitute a news article "newsworthy," are ingrained in texts and guide behaviour Fact : A fact is said to have occurred or is believed to be true. Verification : Verification is the editorial technique used by journalists -- including fact-checkers -- to verify the accuracy of a statement.
11.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Roshco, B. (1975). Newsmaking.
2. Matthews, J. (2009). "Making It Our Own" BBC Newsround Professionals and
Their Efforts to Build a News Agenda for the Young. Television & New
208 Media, 10(6), 546-563.3. Gant, C., & Dimmick, J. (2000). Making local news: A holistic analysis of sources, What Makes News
selection criteria, and topics. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 77(3), 628-638.4. Donohew, L. (1967). Newspaper gatekeepers and forces in the news
channel. Public Opinion Quarterly, 31(1), 61-68.11.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. "News," as its name suggests, often refers to disseminating brand-new
information. News differs from the more meticulous studies of history or other scholarly fields because it is fresh and unpredictable. Even though the most crucial details of a news story have already happened or are anticipated to happen in the future, news prominently portrays the world in the present or recent past.
2. The following points can be considered as criteria for information to become
news: Timeliness Closeness Impact Prominence Weird Conflict
Human Interest
3. The following are the considerations for shaping news:
Truth and Accuracy
Independence
Fairness and Impartiality
Humanity Accountability Check Your Progress: 2
1. The Five Ws, Five Ws and one H, or Six Ws, are inquiries whose responses
are seen as fundamental in acquiring information. They include Who, What, When, Where, and Why. The five Ws are frequently referred to in journalism (see news style), research, and police investigations. They make up a method for discovering all the facts about a subject. According to the Five Ws concept, a report is only deemed complete if it responds to the following queries beginning with an interrogative word:

Journalism and Society It is about whom? What happened? When did it happen? Where did it happen? What caused it, and why? A good news story should always have clear information regarding the who, what, when, where, and why. Some authors would include a sixth question, too: "How," even though "How" can also be answered by the answers to the previous four questions.
2. In the field of journalism, fact-checking is a particular use or part of verification
which is applied while verifying any fact. Adair points out that verification is a crucial activity that makes fact-checking possible. In their book, "The Elements of Journalism", Tom Rosenstiel and Bill Kovach write, "The essence of journalism is a discipline of verification." That discipline is "a scientific-like approach to getting the facts and the right facts."
3. According to Social Scientist Michael Schudson, "the belief in objectivity is a
faith in 'facts,' a distrust in 'values,' and a commitment to their segregation". Objectivity also outlines an institutional role for journalists as a fourth estate, a body that exists apart from the government and large interest groups. Therefore, the ability to remain impartial, just, and unaffected by one's feelings, prejudices, or preferences is known as objectivity. It prevents social scientists, journalists and professionals in the public domain from interfering with or tampering with the data collecting and processing processes. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Some of the structural and functional limitations faced in the newsmaking
process are as follows: Absence of trust transparency. Different communication philosophies. Working-place disputes. Language and cultural differences. Selective demography of news gathering. Lack of creativity. Limited lifespan of the news item, and Credibility diminished because of the misuse of the medium.
2. On the one hand, an editor sorts through the material and makes it relevant
for the audience while the reporter gathers information on the ground. Editing refers to preparing a print, broadcast, or television news report. A report is read, revised, changed, added value to, polished, enhanced and made better

for publishing throughout the editing process. Editing also includes condensing. What Makes News On the other hand, an individual who conducts all the investigation, writing, and interviewing is a reporter. Their primary duty is to locate a story and compile all the information. Both aim to provide the public with trustworthy news or information.

Journalism and Society
UNIT 12 THE NEWS DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS
Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 Identifying News and Recognising a Story
12.2.1 Developing a News Story Idea
12.2.2 Going Beyond the 5 W's and 1 'H'
12.3 News Production: Concept and Definition
12.3.1 Stages of News Production (Pre to Post-Production)
12.3.2 Key Players in the Process
12.3.3 Comparing News Production in TV/Radio/Print and Digital
12.4 The Television Production Team
12.4.1 News/Data Gathering to News Writing
12.4.2 Discipline of Verification, Independence and Accountability
12.5 Quality Control and Review
12.5.1 Influences on News Production
12.5.2 Conflict of Interests
12.5.3 The End Product
12.5.4 Circulation and Dissemination
12.6 Pedagogical Approaches
12.7 Let Us Sum Up
12.8 Keywords
12.9 Further Readings
12.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
12.0 INTRODUCTION
We have discussed and completed eleven units of this course, encompassing several MIL-related topics. This ranged from understanding media and information literacy to civic participation and right to information and learning theories and enabling environment for MIL along with the national and global audience, their freedom, ethics and social accountability, etc. In Unit 11, the previous unit of this curriculum, we dealt with the newsmaking process, or we can also say that we tried to find out the five Ws and one 'H' of the newsmaking process. While doing so, and through the brainstorming we went through, we touched upon various stages and components of newsmaking. This included discussing news factors as a constant, considerations and thoughts while making judgments about news, news value, the difference between facts and verifications, objectivity and non- partisanship in the newsroom, limitations and inherent restrictions while churning out news for the audience and last, importance of news in our life.

In this unit, we'll be moving a step further in this direction. Since you have understood The News Development Process the components that constitute news, we'll now discuss the news development process within the newsroom without differentiating between the newsrooms. This means that we'll have a broader spectrum of discussion, which will have TV, Newspaper, Radio and Digital newsrooms as main subjects. The process of producing newspapers/news bulletins or broadcasting news from a radio station is a process that begins with the collection of news items, articles, editorials, advertorials, and advertising and ends with the printing and folding of the physical copy, airing of news bulletin through radio broadcasts and telecasting news from news channels or publishing online through a digital platform. Pre-press, press, and post- press are the three stages of the production process. The audio-visual medium consists of primarily three stages: pre-production, production, and post-production. However, we should not forget that the production process starts only when news/content gathering is done in advance, so in practice, it has four stages. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between the terms "production process" and "manufacturing" since, practically in every nation, the "production process" is where many taxes are assessed and collected. Manufacturing also refers to the phases of packaging and packing because it is at this step that the product becomes marketable, especially in the Print sector where news pieces are often printed in newspapers. It is possible to think of news production as the process of turning occurrences into news that can be published or aired in one of the many media outlets based on a set of standardised and accepted criteria. It is defined as an activity where "news workers/ journalists are engaged in the production of the written, visual, or auditory materials classified as news and information." Therefore, from here, we start our quest to learn about the news development process in this unit, which is specially dedicated and carved for the purpose.
12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: describe the process of development of news; developing a news story idea; four stages of news production; fact-checking methods; and influences and conflict of interests.
12.2 IDENTIFYING NEWS AND RECOGNISING
A STORY
Whether a story is newsworthy or not depends on the five main fundamental criteria. However, knowing that a good narrative should include at least two people is important. It's critical to remember that, even if a story is noteworthy, it will likely not be able to compete with breaking news content like a royal engagement, an international disaster or some major political development.

Journalism and Society 1. Timeliness: Newsworthy subjects are those that are currently happening. Customers/readers/viewers value immediate updates and ignore outdated, unrelated content. What occurred last week is no longer fascinating; what happened today is news.
2. Inferring: A noteworthy tale has a large social impact. The media will pay
greater attention to a fire that forced the evacuation of a whole apartment at a big posh colony/complex than a single home or JJ cluster in a slum area.
3. Proximity: Local stories will be more relevant and get more publicity if they
are closer to the action. Distance between locations is only one aspect of proximity; it also involves interpersonal connections. News about the northeast may not be as important for people residing in Delhi or Mumbai, but it would definitely be important for residents of Kolkata or Darjeeling.
4. Prominence: In every society, celebrity status naturally gives a person more
media attention.
5. Human Interest: This is one such feature of newsworthiness that ignores
some of the other comparatively important requirements. Human-interest tales arouse feelings and provoke reactions. These stories frequently do not pass away in front of us and cannot significantly impact many or many individuals. These fascinating or unusual stories are frequently featured in a separate section of publications and broadcasts but are considered to be most read and relatable by the audience. So, next time you read a newspaper or read news online, try to determine what made the story intriguing to you that made you read the newspaper; it would surely fit into one of the categories we have discussed here in this section.
12.2.1 Developing a News Story Idea
The creation of story ideas is a collaborative effort between editors and reporters in any and every newsroom. Reporters should make thorough submissions to editors rather than expecting them to accept every clumsy idea. Editors are supposed to assist journalists in crafting, concentrating, and delivering stories. Before you even determine if and how to pursue a new and challenging story, particularly one that will take some time to complete, you may need to do a lot of reporting and writing. Some advice for news professionals: Write down your thoughts: Write a comprehensive proposal for a significant business narrative, especially a project concept. This provides the editor with additional in-depth material to think about and discuss with other team members and editors. A written request necessitates thought and action. Writing also gets you started on narrowing your effort and creating the narrative. Sometimes, a strong proposal may serve as the foundation for a series summary or a story's beginning. Offer relevant news items: Newsworthy, current stories should and will surely attract your editors. The same goes for projects. Be sure to mention the potential news value of your suggestion. Should it be used before, following, or during a forthcoming event? Would a birthday, holiday, or hearing serve as a time marker? Has the matter become more urgent due to a recent report or

decision? An editor or channel head might properly remark that the story The News Development Process could be done at any moment if a reporter suggests an "evergreen" story that could be completed at any time, frequently indicating that there are more urgent matters to deal with. If your article seems timeless, explain to the editor why it is still relevant today. Find a new perspective while reviving an old idea. Make detailed and persuasive suggestions: Don't suggest a thorough investigation. The editor may quickly acquire a sense of the story you want to convey and start experiencing the reporter's joy because of the narrow focus on the story idea. Describe in your note why readers will care about this article. Even if you believe that the relevance or significance of the story is quite obvious, explain to your editor why readers should care about it and how you plan to make that relation obvious in the narrative. Bring clarity to the table. Take a look at earlier reporting: Check out the coverage in other publications/channels. If your publication or another paper covered this topic a few months or years ago, explain how the situation has evolved in this period or how this particular story will vary now from before. Describe how you plan to investigate the problems the competition has overlooked. Share your knowledge. The more you understand, the more persuasively you can express your desire to learn. Your chances of hearing that the story would be worth pursuing "some other day" increase when it looks more hypothetical or speculative in nature. Inform your editor of your expected discoveries from the coverage. Although you don't require all the details in your proposal, you must have enough information to convince your editor. Try not to give up quickly: Ask your editor why they don't want to write a certain article if you think they should not miss it. Determine precisely what is missing from your proposal. Keep in mind that the editor might be correct. The notion may have delighted you that you lost perspective on it. Alternatively, it's also possible that you left out some crucial details from your proposal. You might need to conduct extra study to persuade your editor of the local impact. You may also have overlooked adding a news peg to the proposal. If the editor makes reasonable arguments that you can answer, you could decide to continue with the narrative further.
12.2.2 Going Beyond the 5 W's and 1 'H'
Everyone is familiar with the standard "5 W" inquiries that journalists ask: who, what, where, when, and why (with an added "how"). But in addition to those foundational inquiries, you should consider the following six questions. Although they are centred on the process of storytelling, they are, in essence, information given by journalists. Your responses to these queries can go through a change during the consumption process of news. It's perfectly fine. The aim is to make a creative investment at the start of your watching or reading an article or news capsule that will guide you till the finish of it. What is the central query of the story? You may be familiar with composing key statements or asking questions while watching/ reading the news. However, questions are always better than assertions. A question provides the audience with a task or a challenge to complete. The report or news

Journalism and Society creates a journey for the listener or reader while focusing on the process and ways through which that question is addressed. (For instance, "Why are sports person voting against their team members in an election?") One needs to be careful while consuming news since there could be more than one story if you have multiple inquiries about a news item. You need to choose one and respond fully to it to find answers to your questions. What does the story not concern? Journalists often take too much load in one story that they file, which is too frequent. This makes sense for them as media professionals, and they feel obligated to be thorough in their work and worry about the repercussions of missing out on a detail. However, the fact remains that no tale/story -- not even a one-hour documentary or a lengthy piece of 2500 words in The Times of India -- can cover the entirety of a subject. It's their primary responsibility to provide information memorably and straightforwardly, but you, as a news consumer, must outline the possible angles, inquiries, and contexts in the news item. Compare them to your driving query. Do they help you in getting your query answered? Or did it divert or disperse the attention from the main topic? After that, decide whether the content is worth watching or reading. How do we ensure that the news item is accurate in representation? The first step is to check the story's transparency in the first place. Does it explicitly state that there are several opinions, even if it doesn't explore them? Second, look for tension. One-sided stories frequently lack the tension that makes for a gripping tale. Therefore, consider where the conflict is, even if your attention is on a single individual or circumstance. (There would be no story without conflict, suspense, or anything important at risk.) Finally, as an audience, we should not forget that equity or fairness across coverage is possible in every situation. Although no single article can fairly represent every point of view, a thorough coverage can do it. What components make a perfect recipe for news? A reporter/presenter prepares their story's elements in advance as it aids them in conceiving the story and its coverage planning. However, the onus lies on us as viewers/readers to know who the crucial voices in our society are. What difficult situation requires explanation in a report? Which statement best answers your central query? What connection will unite different parts of the story or incident? What characterises it? Pondering and thinking about all this will give you an understanding of the whole idea of new development in the newsroom or a news professional's mind, further empowering your understanding of news. Do not think the solutions to these issues are just out there, waiting for you to understand them. Not at all. You must make decisions when responding to these questions and tackle them efficiently. You need to free yourself from preconceived notions to create them independently. This will enable you to explore news beyond the five Ws and one H.

The News Development
Activity - 1 Process Create an issue plan for the next publication/programme for a newspaper or television news bulletin. The issue plan must include the lineup of articles or stories to be written or produced based on their inclusion, the story's scope, and the possible angle or treatment of each story. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1. What are the five criteria for a story to be newsworthy?

2. What are the key questions to ask after the 5Ws and 1H in a news story?

12.3 NEWS PRODUCTION: CONCEPT AND
DEFINITION
By portraying the news as a practice, the International Encyclopaedia of Communication describes news as 'the product of teamwork in media outlets' (Nossek, 2008). However, by taking into account specific characteristics, such as tasks, structures, procedures, routines, and impacts on the news, the concept of "news creation" goes beyond this. News production can be seen as transforming events through systematic criteria into news that is publishable in the media. News production tasks are activities 'where news workers/journalists produced the written, visual, or audio texts designated as news and information appearing in print media and on broadcast and cable television, radio, and the Internet' (Ettema, 2008). The major duties of these news professionals are to "report, investigate, write, and edit stories as well as develop and combine visual pictures and the graphic formats for news and information." Editors, producers, and news directors participate at a higher level of news production in the selection of news, which frequently involves a process outside the control of news employees. News production is described by Weischenberg and Matuschek (2008) as 'the process where in the modern newsroom, a journalist controls everything - the electronic gathering of information (e.g., through an online news ticker), the text processing software, the layout, and the printing which in essence is the description of the process for the news production.' The majority of news is created within the restrictions of news organisations. The editorial hierarchy typically has three layers of decision-making authority: The lowest category of journalists comprises reporters with little autonomy. The news and information are gathered and produced by these journalists, who often have little to no editorial

Journalism and Society responsibility. "junior managers" are at the intermediate level in the editorial structure. These journalists have operational power, and they regularly make operational choices. They are often in charge of the newsroom's smaller departments, such as a beat, a desk, or a bureau. Senior or executive management holds the last level of strategic power in the newsroom. They can shape the strategic objectives of their news organisations. Regarding the organisational design of newsrooms, it can be said that division of labour is a common feature. Reporters, editors, and news commentators are the three roles that newsrooms commonly divide their staff into (columnists). For journalists, news routines are "repeated techniques and patterns that facilitate job completion and assure immediacy in an unpredictable environment while working under production restrictions" (Lowrey, 2008). There are several kinds of news routines, such as those for news collection, selection, writing, editing, layout/design, fact-checking, and editorial coordination and administration. Influences on news creation come from various levels, including the level of the person, media routines, organisation, extra-media level, and ideological level. (Shoemaker & Reese, 1996). According to comparative research on journalists' views of these factors, political, economic, organisational, professional, procedural, and reference groups were identified as the six main levels of impact (Hanitzsch et al., 2010). It was believed that organisational, institutional, and operational impacts were more potent than political and fiscal pressures. As we all know, information on recent events is generally known as news. This can be expressed in several ways, such as by spoken communication, writing, mailing, broadcasting, electronic communication, or even through eyewitness and other third- party witness testimony. The term "hard news" is often used to distinguish news from soft media. A news producer is a professional journalist who chooses and supervises the stories and topics the news will cover. They work with journalists, editors, desk staff and directors to meet deadlines and offer consistent time slots while ensuring that the material is produced efficiently. The production of news by an army of news producers, as well as entertainment-related video and audio content for diverse audiences to consume on a variety of digital and online phones, social networking sites, and broadcast media, including radio, is primarily known as mass communication and is an intrinsic and most important part of news journalism. A Producer is expected to be able to properly time the newscast while working with the studio staff, anchors, input and output team, reporters and stringers in the field and various other office support staff, including the ingest, assignment and team of video editors. A producer must be able to write swiftly and proficiently and make sound judgments about the news. Content generation, pre-press, press and postpress are the stages of the production process. The producer must understand the difference between the process of manufacturing and manufacturing as an independent exercise. The process of manufacturing news while coordinating with the whole team, from those who are based in the newsroom to those who are working from the field, is actually the process or effort taken towards producing news. When we/work as news producers, compiling information diligently is equally crucial while generating a news report. It's normally the producer only who, with the passage of time, is promoted to the desk/shift editor. Thus, he or she must learn to choose news items while keeping the listeners' interests in mind. Therefore, he or she must also be aware of these skills. A news producer should know to organise the news story in decreasing order of interest and significance in the rundown of the news bulletin. This

is described as the bunching of the elements, where the most significant and engaging The News Development Process information should appear at the top of the bulletin, and the least significant information should appear at the bottom. The goal is to keep the audience's interest for the longest amount of time. When significant news is unavailable on a particular day, sports and weather stories are given prominence. If there is a hurricane that hits some locations, if Indian athletes win a major competition, or if there are other significant sporting events, the scenario will change. News from the nation, the world, and your region is covered via national bulletins. Regional bulletins concentrate on local news and developments.
12.3.1 Stages of News Production (Pre to Post-Production)
Content gathering, pre-press, press, and post-press are the four stages that make up the entire production process, and this is also known as production hierarchy. It could be news, a newspaper, a media production or even a radio programme. Every stage has a purpose and a set of objectives, and each must be accomplished before moving on to the next. There are four main stages to it, and the fifth one is added at last in a way we can say, to sum up, the whole pre and post-production exercise, which is called the distribution or dissemination of produced news or production property. The first stage of news production, as mentioned above, is content gathering, which falls into the story planning category. While planning the story only, the producer ideates the story, the concept, and the subject as the target audience. Once there is clarity on these points, content is gathered from diverse perspectives to dig deeper into the subject. Once the planning is done, the next stage is the pre-press stage, where a lot of time is spent researching the subject/topic of the production. All background information, questions that must be addressed, facts, draft, framework, initial script, etc., are prepared. But, even while doing so, you as a producer have to be prepared for the unexpected at the last moment. The pre-press stage also includes the availability of the logistics. The guest lineup, the machines, the edit bays, the camera, the vehicle, the interviewee, equipment, permission of the editor, etc. Figure 1: News production hierarchy From the pre-press stage, one moves towards the 'PRESS' stage of the production process. This is the actual stage where all planning is put into action, and while doing so, you also have to take care of the quality control of the production, the hygiene, and the order of the production process. All materials gathered for the production are being put to use, news angles are covered, HDL, body and summary of the story are devised, angels developed,

Journalism and Society and facts and ethics are cross-checked; all this is done to ensure that whatever has been produced by you as producer makes sense, is not confusing and fits the bill of an impartial and objective news item. The final stage is the post-production stage. Here, editing moderation of the produced product/story is done to suit the availability of time and space is adjusted and aligned. The producer ensures that the available resources are used in the best possible manner. It is clear and not confusing in its final form; it will inform and educate the audience and may give way to a public debate but won't make unnecessary noise. The post-production stage is also the last opportunity for you as a producer to mend if any mistake has been made unknowingly or because of a lack of knowledge and experience. It also apprised the producer of his work and its effect on the audience. Did you do well or made some mistakes? All this and many more queries are addressed in the final and last stage of the post-production, the most important of which is whether the whole exercise was rewarding in professional terms.
12.3.2 Key Players in the Process
In this unit, we are discussing the development process of news, and till now, we have discussed in detail the various stages of news production. Now that we have gained a fairly good idea about the various stages through which news is produced, we would like to delve slightly into the subject of key players in this whole process. But there is a catch to this; for some of you, the term key players could mean human beings or human minds involved in this whole process, which is correct, but- for some people, who could be called media professionals or media creators, key-players in the production process could entirely mean different things. They could carry altogether different and distinct connotations. Let's discuss in brief what or who are those key players:
1. Headline: The heading or the title of the news piece is the headline and easily
the most important key player of any piece of news, irrespective of the medium.
2. The byline or reporter's sign-off is the next important player in the news
development process. This line reveals the author of the piece or despatch news capsule, along with their location. Start of the piece.
3. Lead Paragraph/Opening, shot, or opening voice-over is another important
ingredient that makes a piece of news more credible; it lends authenticity to the whole product because it takes the audience to the location from where the story is filmed.
4. Supporting Paragraph or body of the story: this is the premise on which the
story is built. It also gives space to the second version of the whole story, making the story objective and unbiased. Having said all the above points, let's not forget to mention some intangible key-playing elements in the news development process, which come to the fore or seek validation through the journalists involved in news production. A journalist normally has to play four types of journalistic roles while being on the job or while dealing with news items they are -- normative, cognitive, practised, and narrated -- which correspond to conceptually separate ideas: What journalists should do, what they aspire to do, what they do in practice, and what they believe they are doing are

some important thoughts that invisibly guide this whole process. Look at the figure The News Development Process below, where this idea is explained through pictures. Figure 2: Professional Identity and Roles of Journalists; Oxford research Just go through the terms written on this image, and you will get a glimpse of the various stakeholders competing with each other via the news production staff to get a place in this process. Think about it; this will eventually give you better clarity of the whole picture. Activity - 2 How is News Produced? Visit a television news organisation and interview the following on their respective duties and accountability: Editors- Central desk (Radio, Online, TV) Reporters- Assigned according to beats Segment producers
Camerapersons- Field and Studio
Video Editors
Executive producer Supervising producer Anchors- Read from the prompter Others: character generator operator, researchers, engineering and personnel
12.3.3 Comparing News Production in TV/Radio/Print and
Digital The opening topic of this unit delved into detail with the whole idea of news production. We have till now discussed news story ideas, news production, key players and various stages of news production in totality. Now, we will have an insightful discussion on the differences in news production for different media through which news dissemination occurs. Or to understand the difference in the news production process for different news outlets, which means TV, Radio, Print/Digital. Let's start with the Print media or Newspaper.
1. Newspaper : One is probably more interested in the headlines when they
pick up the morning newspaper from their doorstep than in making it. Even

Journalism and Society though every newspaper is slightly different, the manufacturing steps are surprisingly simple. Before the paper reaches your hands, several people play various roles. The various steps involved in news production in a newspaper are as follows: Newsgathering begins with reporters travelling to their specific beats to find articles and cover events, as well as the marketing section acquiring advertisements. Every newspaper relies heavily on news collection. After the stories were gathered, the sub-editor used a red pen to make corrections to the copies that the reporters supplied. The chief sub-editor then used a blue/ white editor and a green pen to make the final edits. Pre-Press: After editing stories, the editor and other sub-editors will convene an editorial conference to decide what will appear in the paper for the day. Pre-press is where photos are edited, advertisements are created and compared, and newspaper pages are laid out and designed. Page planning, which simulates the final look of each newspaper, is how the newspaper is planned on a mock-up sheet. The newspaper pages are assembled with pre- press text using graphics, cut lines, colours, and images. Press: The primary phase in creating a newspaper is the printing procedure. The pillars in creating and processing print products are efficiency, dependability, and reasonable production.
2. Radio: Radio production entails all duties associated with the audio content
and operation of all programs to be broadcast on radio, including conceptualising the radio show, planning every aspect of it (such as scheduling, sourcing, and guest confirmation), supervising presenters, content producers, assistants, and other crew members, using various broadcast techniques like soundboards and editing/production software, and editing interviews/reports/ conversations. Radio Production: What is it? The process of creating and delivering content for radio, the internet, or other streaming and mobile platforms is known as radio production. Planning a news show or episode concept is the first step, followed by coordinating and carrying out every single task necessary to produce that show. The radio producer is the one who must take the helm of this creatively and organizationally complex process.

A radio producer works "behind the scenes," and their main duty is to ensure The News Development Process that all programs are broadcast according to the established schedule and that the program content is current and well-researched. Radio producers are important when creating a great radio broadcast, even though, as listeners, we may only be familiar with radio jockeys. The field of radio production is perfect for you if you enjoy listening to the radio and are amazed by the exciting, fascinating, and fantastic stuff that is broadcast on it. Figure 3:(Mark D. Plumbley uploaded this figure; A Contextual Study of Semantic Speech
Editing in Radio Production Article Mar 2018)
3. Television: A production is known as a "video production" if it is meant to
be broadcast on any form of television, which includes but isn't limited to Free Television, Pay Television, and Pay-Per-View. An artistically commercial production is not a television production. There are three different kinds of live television production. Live, live-to-tape and pre-produced. The top abilities required to be a successful TV producer are as follows: Task delegation, planning, prioritisation, flexibility, analytical abilities, working in a fast-paced environment, and analytical skills. The producer has to work in different capacities, which are devised according to the five stages of TV production: Stage 1: The idea, also known as project development. Stage 2: The Plan, sometimes referred to as Pre-production

Journalism and Society Stage 3: The Shoot, or the production itself.
Stage 4: The Completed Work or Post-Production
Stage 5: Constitutes the steps involved in wrapping up and broadcasting the news item. The showrunner, executive producers, and editors get things done with the assistance of producers. The script has to be revised or updated as their initial duty. Whether you're recording a television series, a TV news bulletin, a current affairs program, an instructional video, or a 15-second advertisement, editing is probably the most crucial part of any production. Effective editing takes the raw elements and produces a coherent, interesting final product. The thrilling aspect of the entire process is when a newscast is broadcast, which is a really difficult task. Today, creating a newscast isn't just restricted to television; You can also use YouTube or construct your news website to broadcast a daily story. Remember that broadcast journalism is a storytelling profession rather than just reporting facts if you are committed to doing one. Figure 4: (Rundown of a News bulletin. Image credit: Sean Thorp) Figure 5: (Television live studio with news anchors, floor director, and camera operators | Images credit: TV5) Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers 224 2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit

1. What are the three levels of decision-making authority in the editorial hierarchy of The News Development
Process a newsroom?

2. What are the stages of news production?

3. Which are key players in a news report?

12.4 THE TELEVISION PRODUCTION TEAM
Personnel working in TV production are typically divided into two groups: above-the- line and below-the-line. Technical staff members such as camera, audio, TD, VTR, grip, and gaffer are categorised as below-the-line. In contrast, creative staff members such as producers, writers, directors, and actors are categorised as above-the-line. The staff in the pre-production phase are the casting director, costume designer, director, location manager, makeup artist, researcher, scriptwriter, set designer, and television producer. The production's visual presentation is the responsibility of the production designer. They create, plan, coordinate, and arrange set design, equipment accessibility, and production appearance on screen. The set designer or scenic designer are other names for the production designer. They hold Master of Fine Arts (MFA) degrees in scenic design, making them skilled professionals. The set designer works with the studio director to build the production's setting, exchanging information about this environment with the technical/studio director. The stage's appearance and technical assembly are designed by the set designer under the direction of the art/studio director. The formation of an internal or external field studio for a specific project is planned and managed by the studio director, who may also serve as the production manager. A person who manages one or more parts of video production for a television program is known as a television producer. Some producers play a more executive role in developing and presenting new shows to television networks. Still, after they are picked up, they concentrate on business issues like contracts and budgets. The daily operations are handled by other producers, who take part in tasks including screenwriting, set design, casting, and directing. A professional operating a film camera or video camera as a film crew member is known as a camera operator or, depending on the situation, a cameraman or camera person. Depending on the situation and technology, a camera operator in a video production may also be referred to as a videographer, television camera operator, or video camera operator. They typically use a professional video camera. A producer of on-air still and motion graphics is known as a graphics coordinator, abbreviated as GC or font assist, and they typically work on television programs. A full page (a graphic that fills the entire screen) or a lower third are only two examples of

Journalism and Society how the graphics coordinator chooses what information should be shown on-air (a bar graphic appearing in the lower third of the screen). A video control operator, sometimes identified as a video engineer or operator, manages the video console in addition to the more common video control. This content includes test patterns as well as live and recorded telecasts. Operators of the video console use dials to adjust the contrast, framing, brilliance, colour balance, and integrity of the transmitted image while keeping an eye on the activity on the set through video monitors and set switches. They keep an eye on the show to verify that it is being transmitted in a technically sound manner, and they examine it to make sure the signal is working properly and prepared for timely broadcasting. Post-production is a step in creating films, videos, audio recordings, and photographs. All production activities which take place after the main shoot or after recording specific program parts are referred to as post-production. Post-production is the umbrella term for a variety of processes. Editing, video editing, colour grading, sound editing, animation and visual effects insertions, screening, and the beginning of the airing process are all post-production stages in television. An expert team is needed to make a televised news broadcast. The entire show's planning, from budgeting to scheduling, is the responsibility of a production crew. A program's financing is arranged by an executive producer, who also usually decides on advertising, material selection, and segment length. They also supervise the production staff. To keep newscasts on schedule and within the executive producer's allotted budget, line producers keep an eye on them. Travelling to the scene of breaking news stories, news reporters speak with people and gather information that news writers then use to create reports. The audience is given access to the news reports by news anchors who operate in a studio. During the broadcast segment featuring a new anchor, a reporter appears on camera to provide extra information.
12.4.1 News/Data Gathering to News Writing
Newsgathering: Observation, dialogue, interviews, and research are the four main approaches that journalists employ to acquire their news. Collecting newsworthy information is known as news gathering. Spreading news information is known as news reporting. The terms "journalist" and "reporter" are interchangeable and have the same meaning. They are people in charge of news gathering and reporting. Observation, discussions with informants, desk and web research, and interviews are the main approaches for acquiring news. A journalist should be able to combine the facts from there to produce reliable reporting. As they transform information into news, reporters often follow a set process. The processes are 1) discovery, 2) information collection,
3) impact judgement, 4) focusing on key components, 5) organising, and 6) successfully
employing language. In the media, news collecting or documenting is a distinct activity, particularly at the start of the communication process. The process of exchanging information can be used to collect data. Interaction and interactivity are made possible via virtual communication. When we examine news stories, we can see that they are based on information from various sources, including tangible sources like books, files, and records, the reporter's observations, source interviews, and online sources. News Writing: News has a lot of potential to be fascinating or even amusing, but its main purpose is to inform people and give them power. Thus, journalism aims to give the public the knowledge they need to make the best decisions for their own lives,

social groups, societies, and governments. Newspapers, radio, and television all employ The News Development Process journalism, sometimes known as news writing, to report stories. The ABCs of news writing--Accuracy, Brevity, and Clarity--must be adhered to while writing in a journalistic style. These three components must be considered in addition to the audience and tone of the story. News articles aim to inform and enlighten readers about current issues and happenings. They are employed to give readers knowledge about the outside world that they require or desire. The purpose of news stories is to keep readers up to date on current affairs and events. They are used to give readers knowledge about the world they need or want to know. The following are the key guidelines for creating effective news stories: First, keep things straightforward and avoid jargon. Get right to the point. The main plot point should be presented in the first paragraph and be captivating enough to draw the reader in. Always answer the questions of who, what, why, where, when, and how.
12.4.2 Discipline of Verification, Independence and
Accountability Quality journalism is characterised by verification, independence, and accountability. It involves determining whether a particular information is reliable and true or not. To present the most accurate account of events, journalists gather data. They consult sources, conduct extensive research, and present reliable documentation to substantiate their claims. Three key ideas -- creativity, humility, and transparency -- form the philosophical cornerstone of the discipline of verification. Transparency implies presenting your evidence so that readers can determine whether or not to accept it. What is ethical journalism? It is news that a dependable, independent organisation has backed up. Independence consists of impartiality mixed with freedom from authority or influence. Along with independence come objectivity, justice, and balance. Media independence is the absence of outside influence or control over a media organisation or person. It distinguishes between independent and state media based on their ability to "make decisions and behave according to their rationale. Accountability is the action of accepting accountability for the reporting. The names of news organisations and the contact information for journalists should be readily available. The ability to acknowledge mistakes when they are made is perhaps most vital for any news organisation or journalist. Accountability journalism, often known as "watchdog" or "investigative" journalism, concentrates on the needs of the public and frequently reveals facts that could be damaging to an advertiser. To achieve this, one should emphasise the four pillars of accountability: people, purpose, performance, and progression. Activity - 3 Analysis of Information Sources Identify a subject or story available in a print or online news story and a public social media post. Consider the following questions: Based on the journalistic process of verification, independence and accountability, is there a difference between the two? Explain. Did the article and social media post follow the verification process? How can you tell? Is the source independent and/or authoritative? Why? Is there accountability on the part of the source? Explain.

Journalism and Society Check Your Progress: 3
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1. How is the personnel in TV news production divided?

2. Explain the process of news gathering and writing for television.

3. What are the characteristics of quality journalism?

12.5 QUALITY CONTROL AND REVIEW
Since the advent of commercial journalism, the news industry has undergone some of the most significant disruptions, making the subject of what makes for high-quality journalism more urgent than ever. The news is no longer the only domain of a small number of specialised institutions that only sporadically share the same ideals or professional standards. The increasing ability of the public to select the news they want and to participate as both producers and consumers has increased the significance of audience preference in determining quality. The debate over how to instil civic and news literacy in young people has gained fresh traction due to the audience's expanding power. When discussing journalism and its quality, it is useful to specify the level. For example, source diversity is often cited as a goal for quality journalism (Napoli 1999; 2003), but the term "source" will vary with the level. An individual story may, for instance, not contain much diversity in sources, but diversity could exist among all the stories available that day about a given event or trend. Thus, the diversity available to a community would be greater if all the journalism products in the market were evaluated. (Lacy and Rosenstiel, 2015). In addition to being vital for its own sake, high-quality news has political repercussions. However, defining, operationalising, and assessing the quality of news media is challenging because the standards for evaluation depend on ideas about the ideal society, which are fundamentally debatable. Despite agreement on the importance of news media quality for society, much confusion exists regarding defining, operationalising, and measuring the construct. Perhaps the most common view is that the news media is getting worse in the era of digitisation. Media organisations are experiencing unprecedented technological, financial, and technological pressures, which have exposed them to severe public scrutiny and put their management practices in the spotlight. In many democratic contexts, media

practitioners have responded to these public pressures by instituting quality control The News Development Process measures to gain public support and forestalling government interference. If quality is seen to be a measure of a journalist's capacity to carry out their duties, then raising the standard of journalism would increase the public's capacity to use it to make wiser judgments and act as a deterrent to abuse and misconduct by those in positions of authority. Quality journalism will mean different things to different people. Still, because of socialising, ideas are much more likely to be exchanged by members of the group who have some kind of similar experience. Finding these shared meanings inside and between groups is key to establishing quality journalism. Broadly, there is more common meaning within groups than between groups.
12.5.1 Influences on News Production
The topic of who the individuals or groups attempting to sway or influence news are has long been relevant. According to several different sources, the government, interest groups, advertising, and other media are the most important factors that affect journalism or news coverage. This influence results from how much of an impact the media has on our personal and professional lives. The "media effect," or mass media, impacts many facets of daily life, including voting behaviour, personal opinions and beliefs, and how someone learns about a subject after receiving erroneous information. Influences from outside the News circle or external influences include The government, advertisers or commercials, interest group organisations, different media or mediums of mass communication and local interests. In the modern world, the media's ever- increasing supply of news and information shapes public opinion. The decision to publish a piece of news can be influenced by political pressure, target rating points (TRPs), and editorial prejudice. Several things influence the decision of what to broadcast or print. First and foremost, following media house policy, the majority of news editors compete for the greatest TRPs, which directly translates into enormous ad earnings. In addition, political pressure may exert pressure on an editor's judgement and force them to publish news that furthers a certain political objective. News articles promoting extreme political beliefs can bring mass public unrest in a nation. Last, a news editor's personal convictions and viewpoints or adherence to the "house style" can provide a news item with a unique perspective. Many media outlets are either pro- or anti- government, pro- or anti-military, and as a result, news editors are forced to follow a specific policy, which in turn influences news. Having listed some prominent external factors affecting news production in any media house, we should not forget some very common and inherent circumstances within these news structures that influence news production in a very subtle and invisible manner. They could be summed up as - time/deadline, speed/competition while delivering news earlier than others, lack of space or airtime, profit/revenue and last but not least, the predominant bias within the newsroom.
12.5.2 Conflict of Interests
The term "conflict of interest" refers to situations in which unspoken duties or allegiances may conceivably intervene between journalists, journalism organisations, and the audience they primarily serve. Conflicts of interest can take many forms, from writing about close friends or relatives to receiving complimentary media copies for review. When journalists establish sides on political or social problems, confrontations also occur. 229

Journalism and Society Conflict of interest has developed into a structural ethical issue for journalism that is integrated into the processes of creating content. Before the advent of digital media, journalists, publishers, and broadcasters recognised it as a challenge that must be addressed. Today, it is purposefully incorporated into journalists' daily tasks. According to Wasserman (2009: 229-241), 'Conflict of interest comprises a variety of instances where undeclared obligations or loyalties exist that might plausibly intervene between journalists and journalism organisations and the public they principally serve.' Dependence on sponsors by news organisations is a huge conflict of interest in journalism. News organisations must uphold their owners' loyalty, another massive conflict of interest in journalism. Conflict of interest is "a clash between a person's self-interest and professional interest or public interest" (Business Dictionary, 2016). Any activity that could endanger the interests of their organisation or the objectivity of communication experts should be avoided. That includes keeping personal objectives apart from those of the company. However, there are six strategies for averting disputes which can lead to a conflict of interest and land anyone in a problem. Keep away from sources who offer you freebies or gifts. Never give money to political or activist organisations. Avoid getting involved in politics. Keep your friendships with the people you cover at a minimum. Family and friends should not be covered. Stay away from financial disputes. These are a few small but day-to-day strategies through which one can not only avoid challenges related to conflict of interest while working as a news producer and a field reporter but what matters, in the end, is that this problem will not end anytime soon.
12.5.3 The End Product
How would you describe the final piece of content you produce? Designing a news magazine, newspaper, or television news program is artistic. However, news articles and products must be produced swiftly and effectively since they are commodities. Instead of worrying about the production and delivery of your stories or news capsules, you should concentrate on the art of delivering them. Few things can compare to the satisfaction of a well-timed, well-executed broadcast, which is why producers spend numerous hours planning and creating their programs. When the program performs at its peak, a producer may feel excitement in the control room. The flow of a good newscast makes it enjoyable to watch. Although it takes a team to make something, the producer is the team leader, bringing the many pieces together and creating a strategy that turns the initial data into a finished good. Despite this, it is important to note that several of the finest news shows are those in which the team reacts to big news rather than following a script or rundown. Producing when you're on the run and knowing that you've pushed yourself and your team to their absolute boundaries to win the big story is the most exhilarating feeling. Countless news and information programs are available on radio, television, and the Internet; your newscast must compete with them. In addition to expanding the variety

of news sources, technology has also made it simpler for viewers to skip commercial The News Development Process interruptions. A lot of research has been done to find out what listeners expect from a broadcast, and generally speaking, some aspects of the program are more appealing. We've talked about how the network's capabilities significantly impact news coverage. One resource type is technical resources like cameras, recorders, and live trucks. Human resources like correspondents, videographers, editors, and others are another. Utilising these tools to create the greatest newscast possible is one of the main responsibilities of a producer. Using all of the resources at our disposal to report far more news is what is meant by "pushing the envelope." Producers often choose to take the safe route and handle things quickly. But in a time of heightened competition and expanded news options, being safe is not necessarily a good idea.
12.5.4 Circulation and Dissemination
The number of copies circulated of a specific publication is measured by its circulation. A publication's viewership is an estimation of its audience. It includes managing grievances, handling new customers and renewals over the counter and by mail, instructing an administrative staff to keep records, alerting customers when their memberships need to be renewed, and more. The circulation department is responsible for circulating and distributing the news product, which is the main source of revenue for the news organisation. It's also the department's responsibility to deliver the news at the right places, like selling the media product, delivering it to the retailer, and collecting data from the subscribers. Circulation managers' role also impacts the survival of media outlets, irrespective of whether they belong to print, digital or electronic media. In today's time, the circulation job is also substituted by digital media and advertising managers. Any media organisation would be successful in its ability to sell its product to the audience, viewers or readers along with producing quality products. As we all know no p, product is produced or manufactured for oneself, but it is for the audience. Thus, any media product's success is directly related to its successful penetration into the audience. It should be able to satisfy the needs of its readers/viewers and be accepted by them. All this comes under the circulation department. News dissemination refers to the entire process by which specific contents are articulated, selected, transformed into news, and received by audiences. News dissemination is the complete process by which certain materials are expressed, chosen, turned into news, and received by news audiences. Instead of being sequential, disseminating news is continuous, dynamic, and synchronically self-referential. The reintroduction of values, meanings, and intents that the public and political actors have acquired leads to a process in which news discourse continually replicates itself from its past in an uncertain way. The dissemination of news content guarantees that the advantages of the work are shared with everyone and that it is put to optimal use, making it a crucial part of the production process. The likelihood that someone will receive and accept information after it has been delivered from a news source is known as an effective information dissemination possibility. To minimise losses and guarantee the safety of humans and subjects alone, it is crucial to understand how different media disseminate information and to have an effective plan for doing so in pre-crisis situations. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit 231

Journalism and Society 1. What are some of the influences on the news production process?

2. What are the strategies for averting a conflict of interest in news production?

3. What is the role of the news circulation department?

12.6 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) Various pedagogical approaches are possible for this unit. However, the most apt pedagogical approach can entail using textual analysis. The learner can analyse newspaper accounts of a major issue or event and examine the information provided. The learner then explains the assessment, considering the factors and process in "identifying news and recognising the story": Elements of the news (5Ws and 1H: Who? What? When? Where? How?) and redefining them: news is data with meaning (who is the character, what is the plot, when is time, where is the setting, why is motivation or causation, how is narrative) The notion of news has expanded over the years to include the questions: "So what?" meaning that the significance should be explained; "What's the solution?" meaning that news can go beyond the important function of exposing problems and give exposure to the range of possible solutions. Journalism is "storytelling with a purpose": finding the information people need to live good lives and presenting the information in a meaningful, relevant and engaging way. Is it possible to assess if the news includes answers to the questions "So what?" and "Is the solution to the problem being reported?". While not all news can include these elements, there is a general drive to ensure that more new stories do so. The learner should also check for verifiability based on the core principles of verification: do not add; do not deceive the audience; be as transparent as possible about methods and motives; rely on your original reporting; and exercise humility. The learner should also apply at least one technique of verification: sceptical editing, accuracy checklist, method of verifying presumed facts, and rules on anonymous sources. A reference that can be used is The Elements of Journalism by Kovach and Rosenstiel.
12.7 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, the main emphasis was to acquaint you with the news development process. Since we all live in a multimedia-centric news production and consumption environment

today, it was important to give an insight into the news development procedure across The News Development Process all three newsrooms. In the previous unit, what is News, I tried to explain the concept of news and its various branches. However, in this unit, topics dealt with in detail are developing news story ideas, news production (pre to post), production team, data/ information gathering, quality control and review of news content, influences and conflict of interests. This is done with the hope that it will help you all understand the news development process in any news organisation. I've tried to comprehensively accommodate the subject in a manner that will clarify all three media - TV, radio, print and multimedia. After going through this unit, we think it will be easier for you to navigate the varied newsroom systems employed to gather information and develop a news item. After reading this chapter, you can evaluate the implicit and visible messages in media using your interpretations.
12.8 KEYWORDS
News Production : News production can be seen as transforming events through systematic criteria into published news in the media. Pre-Press Phase : Pre-Press is where photos are edited, advertisements are created and compared, and all the newspaper pages are laid out and designed. Radio Production : The process of creating and delivering content for radio, the internet, or other streaming and mobile platforms is known as radio production. Post-Production : Post-production is the umbrella term for a variety of processes. Editing, video editing, colour grading, sound editing, animation and visual effects insertions, screening, and the beginning of the airing process are all post-production stages in television. Accountability : Accountability journalism, often known as "watchdog" or Journalism "investigative" journalism, concentrates on the needs of the public and frequently reveals facts that could be damaging to an advertiser. Conflict of Interest : The term "conflict of interest" refers to situations in which unspoken duties or allegiances may intervene between journalists, journalism organisations, and the audience they primarily serve. News Dissemination : News dissemination refers to the entire process by which specific contents are articulated, selected, transformed into news, and received by news audiences.
12.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Lacy, S., & Rosenstiel, T. (2015, March 30). Defining and Measuring Quality
Journalism. Retrieved December 29, 2022, from https://www.issuelab.org/ resources/31212/31212.pdf

Journalism and Society 2. Obuya, J. (2020). Quality Control in journalism: The management of Media Accountability in newsrooms in Kenya [Abstract]. International Journal on Media Management, 22(3-4), 134-143. doi:10.1080/
14241277.2021.1872153
3. Bachmann, P., Eisenegger, M., & Ingenhoff, D. (2021). Defining and measuring
news media quality: Comparing the content and audience perspectives. The International Journal of Press/Politics, 27(1), 9-37. doi:10.1177/ 1940161221999666
4. Kelly, M. P., Martin, N., Dillenburger, K., Kelly, A. N., & Miller, M. M.
(2018). Spreading the news: History, successes, challenges and the ethics of effective dissemination. Behaviour Analysis in Practice, 12(2), 440-451. doi:10.1007/s40617-018-0238-8
5. Katakis, I., Tsoumakas, G., Banos, E., Bassiliades, N., & Vlahavas, I. (2008).
An adaptive, personalised news dissemination system [Abstract]. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 32(2), 191-212. doi:10.1007/s10844-008- 0053-8
12.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The five criteria for checking if a story is newsworthy or not are:
Timeliness Inferring Proximity Prominence
Human Interest
2. The key questions to ask after the 5Ws and 1H in a news story are:
What is the central query of the story? What does the story not concern? How do we ensure that the news item is accurate in representation? What components make a perfect recipe for news? Check Your Progress: 2
1. The editorial hierarchy typically has three layers of decision-making authority:
The lowest category of journalists comprises reporters with little autonomy. The news and information are gathered and produced by these journalists, who often have little to no editorial responsibility. "junior managers" are at the intermediate level in the editorial structure. These journalists have operational power, and they regularly make operational choices. They are often in charge of the newsroom's smaller departments, such as a beat, a desk, or a bureau.

Senior or executive management holds the last level of strategic power in the The News Development Process newsroom. They can shape the strategic objectives of their news organisations.
2. The five stages of news production are:
Content Gathering Stage
Pre-Press Stage
Press Stage
Post-Production Stage
Distribution or Dissemination Stage
3. The key players in the news development process are:
Headline Byline or reporter's sign-off Lead Paragraph/Opening shot or opening voice-over Supporting Paragraph or body of the story Check Your Progress: 3
1. Personnel working in TV production are typically divided into two groups:
above-the-line and below-the-line. Technical staff members such as camera, audio, TD, VTR, grip, and gaffer are categorised as below-the-line. In contrast, creative staff members such as producers, writers, directors, and actors are categorised as above-the-line. The staff in the pre-production phase are the casting director, costume designer, director, location manager, makeup artist, researcher, scriptwriter, set designer, and television producer.
2. Journalists or Reporters are in charge of news gathering and reporting.
Observation, discussions with informants, desk and web research, and interviews are the main approaches for acquiring news. A journalist should be able to combine the facts from there to produce reliable reporting. As they transform information into news, reporters often follow a set process. The processes are: 1) discovery, 2) information collection, 3) impact judgement,
4) focusing on key components, 5) organising, and 6) successfully employing
language.
3. Quality journalism is characterised by verification, independence, and
accountability. It involves determining whether a particular information is reliable and true or not. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Influences from outside the News circle or external influences consist of - The
government, advertisers or commercials, interest group organisations, different media or mediums of mass communication and local interests. Moreover, the internal influences could be summed up as - time/deadline, speed/competition while delivering news earlier than others, lack of space or airtime, profit/revenue and last but not least, the predominant bias within the newsroom.
2. There are six strategies for averting disputes which can lead to a conflict of
interest and land anyone in a problem.

Journalism and Society Keep away from sources who offer you freebies or gifts. Never give money to political or activist organisations. Avoid getting involved in politics. Keep your friendships with the people you cover at a minimum. Family and friends should not be covered. Stay away from financial disputes.
3. The circulation department is responsible for circulating and distributing the
news product, which is the main source of revenue for the news organisation. It's also the department's responsibility to deliver the news at the right places, which is like selling the media product, delivering it to the retailer, and collecting data from the subscribers. Circulation managers' role also impacts the survival of media outlets, irrespective of whether they belong to print, digital or electronic media.

The News Development
UNIT 13 NEWS REPORTING AND THE
Process
POWER OF THE IMAGE
Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 News Reporting for Traditional Versus New Media
13.2.1 The Immediacy of Breaking News
13.2.2 News Reporting for Newspapers and Magazines
13.2.3 News Reporting for TV News Channels and Radio
13.2.4 News Reporting for Online Digital and Multimedia Platforms
13.3 Good Practices of News Reporting
13.3.1 On-site Reporting
13.3.2 Sourcing and Citation of Information
13.3.3 Authenticity and Credibility
13.3.4 Cross-Checking and Double-Checking Facts and Figures
13.3.5 Non-Prejudicial
13.3.6 Privacy and Confidentiality
13.4 The Power of Image in News Reporting
13.4.1 Visuals and Photographs: Impacts and Response
13.4.2 Reporting for Audio and Visual Media
13.4.3 Writing for Visual Media
13.4.4 Leveraging the Visual Quotients
13.5 Learning Attributes of News Reporting
13.6 Pedagogical Approaches
13.7 Let Us Sum Up
13.8 Keywords
13.9 Further Readings
13.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
13.0 INTRODUCTION
As you learned in the earlier Units, the role of media is to inform, educate and entertain people. Among the three roles, informing is important, made possible by news gathering and news reporting by journalists and media houses. The role of providing news or information has, however, undergone a significant change since the first newspaper came into existence. As you know, news reporting is both a science and an art, and technological changes have altered how news is gathered and the tools used in the process. Because of the above changes, news content has also been transformed. Earlier, news reporting was a monolithic and linear process, with reporters reporting on facts and events. Now, news reporting claims to probe news or the truth behind the news, making news reporting the art of investigative journalism or sting operation as it

MIL, Society and Ethics has come to be called in the late 20th and 21st centuries. It means news reporting is no longer confined to chronicling the events but has begun to ask fundamental questions. The earlier questions of the 5 Ws - who, what, when, where and why- now emphasize the investigation part. As news reporting often deals with people in power, social hierarchy and political control, the role of media has been further magnified with the advent of new media, which has begun questioning the earlier paradigm. We all know that media and journalists are not stand-alone identities but derive their role and responsibility from the ecosystems in which they are born and evolved. Like all other agencies, it attempts to adjust and derive its sense of identity depending on the social and political system it belongs to. As a result, you will find significant changes in news reporting related to democratically, authoritarian, or Communist-run regimes. The media often attempts to maintain the status quo and adjust to its ecosystem's social and political realities. However, this is not always the case, as the media also fought against oppressive rules and authoritarian governments in some countries. They have been responsible for creating public awareness and subsequent change in the regime. Recently, Reporters Without Borders, an NGO of independent journalists, has been fighting to safeguard the values of journalism and the right to freedom of information.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After you have gone through this unit, you will be able to.
1. understand news reporting in the traditional versus New media;
2. describe the good practices of news reporting;
3. analyse the power and perceptive image and its impact;
4. understand the use of new technology in news gathering and in; and
5. learn the attributes of news reporting.
13.2 NEWS REPORTING FOR TRADITIONAL
VERSUS NEW MEDIA
Among all aspects of journalism, news gathering is one of the most vital features as it determines the character of the publication and helps create a brand. With the technology change, while other aspects of media organizations have been deeply impacted, news reporting has remained a constant with not much impact on it. Whether it's traditional media of newspapers, radio and magazines or the new and digital media, news reporting has remained the same. It still follows the old reporting principles from the ground zero and of authenticity and credibility, which adds credence. It still needs field work as vigorous as in the traditional media. What has changed are the technology and the means of communication, which have accelerated the process. Mobile phones, the Internet and social media have significantly reduced the time lag before the news reaches the readers. News reporting is the perennial element of journalism, enjoying constant value, irrespective of the technologically-driven media. With the emergence of new technology, the periodicity of news gathering has increased

as the readers vie for instant gratification in reports and news bytes. It has accelerated Audience: National and
Global Contexts
the process of news gathering.
13.2.1 The Immediacy of Breaking News
The immediacy of breaking news refers to minute-to-minute reporting on social, political, or economic events affecting many people. The immediacy of news reporting gains more importance in natural calamities like earthquakes, floods, cloudbursts, hurricanes, pandemics, etc. It was recently evident during the COVID-19 pandemic that the shortage of vaccines and oxygen cylinders became vital to save lives. In addition, international war and conflict are other areas where breaking news gains the utmost importance. The Russian attack on Ukraine and the civilian population were put on alert through breaking and inside reports. But the hunger for immediate news has a flip side, which sometimes becomes harmful and compromises principled journalism. Understandably, it has accelerated the process of news gathering, but it has also compromised the quality of news and its credibility. If you remember, in the traditional media, there was no concept of breaking news in the 24-hour newspaper publication cycle. Instead, it carried the last news received with the title "At the time of going to press " Another aspect of breaking news has been its compromised position vis-a-vis the process of gatekeeping, which plays a vital role in the credibility of news publishing. With the increased flow of news and the haste of news delivery, there is less time for the media to check the integrity of the information. It is one of the reasons that electronic media, especially TV news channels and digital media, focus on event-based direct broadcasts or live telecasts. The event-based reporting is based on the premise that 'what is seen is what is believed in' as readers are directly transported to the site of the incident. There is another group of news reporting called 'developing news', which is directly related to breaking news. There is no final in such cases, and the news is still unfolding. Such news needs continuous reporting with a timeline before reaching the outcome. One of the recent examples of such news was a change in the political regime in Maharashtra in 2022 after the defection of Shiv Sena MLAs. A group of MLAs led by Eknath Shinde had revolted against the Shiv Sena chief and Maharashtra Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray. Before the no-trust motion could be tabled in the Legislative Assembly, these MLAs were flown to Guwahati and later to Goa and interned in hotels. The incident occurred in June 2022 and continued for weeks before Mr Shinde was sworn in as the state's chief minister. This story was a developing story as every day, some or the other news was filtering into the media about the MLAs, the incumbent chief minister, and the Supreme Court's decision on the issues. Such news stories need continuous reporting as they can decide the country's political future and its people.
13.2.2 News Reporting for Newspapers and Magazines
Unlike reporting on breaking news in TV news channels and digital media, newspapers and magazines have a different role because of their production cycle. The next edition of the daily newspaper comes only 24 hours after you have received your newspapers early in the morning. As newspapers are not in a hurry to provide breaking news, they use the available time for in-depth reporting on the issue. A newspaper tries to find out the reason, the cause, and its impact on policies, people, the economy, and politics. Depending on the impact value of the news, some news makes it to the paper's front page while others recede to the inside pages. The reporters and correspondents of

MIL, Society and Ethics newspapers prefer not only to visit the site of the action but also to meet people related to the event and take quotes from government officials. They are also accompanied by photographers who take the visual shots and send them to the news desk. At times, when the newspaper doesn't have the reporters at the site of action, the story is filed based on agency reports to which these newspapers subscribe. Some of the prominent news agencies of India are the Press Trust of India (PTI), ANI, IANS and Reuters, AP, and AFP, among others. However, what differentiates newspaper reporting from other mass media is its emphasis on details and the background to which readers can relate. Sometimes, when the events have high news value, the editorial team writes an editorial or opinion piece on it while critically examining the issue and providing an informed opinion to its readers. In fact, by doing so, newspapers play another vital role in creating public opinion among their readers. News reporting for magazines is very different from TV news channels or newspapers. There are various types of magazines, and depending on their genre, they may or may not need news reporting. Depending on the periodicity of the magazine - weekly, fortnightly or monthly, the editorial team decides the nature and frequency of news reports. While dealing with the subject in detail, the magazine news reports provide an analytical approach to the subject, with historical background, quotes from policymakers and its long-term impact. They also refer to prominent books on the subject and quote experts while strengthening their arguments through data displayed in tables and graphs. Unlike the new features in the newspapers, which occupy four or five columns, magazine reporting and field dispatches are mostly long-form, spreading writing through 4 to 12 pages. Another important difference in the form and nature of editorial content is that magazine news may take a different angle on social issues that may not find a place on the front pages of newspapers. The magazine news reporting has a long shelf life and is sometimes preserved for reference. Some of India's popular English news magazines are India Today, Frontline, The Week, Outlook, Open, and Caravan. Some of these magazines, like India Today and Outlook, also come in Hindi and other regional languages. A large number of magazines are genre-based and do not need news reporting. Some of them have niche audiences like women and youth. These magazines
include Samanya Gyan Darpan, Vanitha, Pratiyogita Darpan, Sarita,
Grihashobha, The Sportstar, Meri Saheli, Bal Bhaskar, etc.
13.2.3 News Reporting for TV News Channels and Radio
Unlike news reporting for newspapers and magazines, TV News Channels have 24/7 periodicity and need continuous news feeds to survive and participate in the highly competitive broadcast space. TV news channels involve a high setup and operational cost and employ many people, creating high business risk. Their revenue earning capacity depends on their Television Rating Point (TRP), a measure of viewership and success of the TV news channels. To enhance TRP and increase viewership, most TV news channels have evolved their unique selling point (USP) by calling themselves the fastest and most credible, and some claim that they provide news or the truth behind the news. All these features mentioned above are directly or indirectly related to the process of news gathering and news reporting. The 24/7 news channels compete to be the first to provide news related to events, politicians, or celebrities. A TV news anchor's role is to read these stories and dramatize certain events to create curiosity and attract people's attention to news stories. The broadcast of these stories assumes different forms depending on the importance of the story, visuals, and other

details available on the TV news channels. The news about which not many details and Audience: National and
Global Contexts
visuals are available and has only one line of information is run through tickers or running script you see on your TV screen. Sometimes, the reporter does a piece to the camera (PTC) and addresses the viewers directly while reporting on the event. As seen, the news-gathering process is almost the same for all mediums. Still, TV news reporting is more complex and involves multiple professionals like cameramen, Outdoor Broadcast Van (Ob Van), Liv U and Dejero, Satcom and Ingest and other infrastructure. Reporting on an event uses all forms of communication, including words, pictures, graphics, and video. It should be remembered that illiterate people also view TV news channels, so particular emphasis should be given to simplicity and clarity of expression, words and phrases. As a rule, such news should begin by providing the most crucial part of the information first, followed by less important and then least important parts in sequential order while narrating the story. The reporter and anchor are also advised to use simple, brief sentences and avoid ambiguity and incoherence while reporting events. For a TV reporter, it is also essential to understand the nature and profile of viewers to present news in a way easily understood by them.
13.2.4 News Reporting for Online Digital and Multimedia
Platforms Online and digital multimedia have significantly changed accessibility and reach to readers and viewers. At the same time, it has diversified the mechanism of news reporting, thus involving the masses in the process. You must have seen a lot of videos and news alerts by common people posted on social media going viral, and the mainstream media subsequently taking up those feeds and reporting on it. Digital media enjoys a unique position because of its distinctive news reporting and dissemination features. Its segmented and customized features allow catering to different audience groups, whether the audience is literate or illiterate. Unlike TV and newspapers, it doesn't need much setup and operational cost and can be started by anyone with a meagre investment. You must have seen many YouTubers and small and big journalists running their websites, blogs, and YouTube channels with decent followers and subscriber bases. While the process of news reporting largely remains the same in all mediums, the difference lies in the infrastructure required and the narrative style of digital journalists. To have a digital platform, you need a hosting site, mobile phone/laptop and editing software before putting the news content on the website or uploading a video on YouTube. For the real-time display of news content, a digital journalist can also livestream his/her reporting and tag people and authorities related to it. Suppose you are catering to a particular segment of people or a news subject. In that case, you can hashtag them so that they are easily searched and located by readers interested in the subject. In addition to the real-time display of news, digital media also provides a high degree of interactivity with its readers, with whom digital journalists could interact and receive feedback, a vital feature of all active online journalism. Digital media's ubiquity has transformed how news is read and accessed with features like customized news for the segmented audience. Unlike newspapers, which depend on circulation and TV broadcasting facilities, digital media needs a device and Internet connection both on the part of the source and the receiver of the information. A reader can choose to read the news of his/her interest area and ignore the rest by subscribing to customized news, which is tailor-made to their needs and finds a place in their mailbox. Thus, in digital media, you can read your news anytime and anywhere (provided

MIL, Society and Ethics it has Internet facilities). One can even go back to the news later by saving the Uniform Resource Locator (URL), unlike in the newspaper and TV, which is geographically and timely bound. There is yet another feature of digital media that makes it unique in the form of editing news stories. Newspapers and TV do not allow people to correct or update a story once it is printed or broadcast. In digital media, one can re-edit the story, make corrections, update new developments and publish it again. However, the same is not applicable in the case of videos that have to be re-uploaded. But to maintain the credibility and authenticity of the news, it is always advisable to mention the changes at the end of the news article so that readers who visited the page earlier know it. Activity - 1 Examine the media coverage of current events and issues and assess to what extent these concerns are valid. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the production cycle of newspapers?

2. What is the news-gathering process of TV channels?

3. What are the benefits of news reporting for digital and online media?

13.3 GOOD PRACTICES OF NEWS REPORTING
With the advent of digital media and the mushrooming of social networking sites, the number of media platforms for news dissemination has increased. This has led to the transmission of unverified news content, mainly misinformation and disinformation and has come to form what has been popularly called fake news. But it must be noted that there is nothing called fake news. News cannot be fake because it has passed through the muster of verification and gatekeeping - the cardinal principles of journalism. At best, these are fake content and not news. It must also be admitted that there has been considerable liquidation in the gatekeeping process. While it was a sacrosanct principle in the traditional media when reporters and correspondents were asked to verify news several times before it was published, the same is not true in digital media. In the fast- paced breaking news culture, digital and TV media are always in a hurry to be the first ones to publish breaking news, even at the cost of going wrong. This often puts a question mark on the credibility of the news and media organizations. Nonetheless,

many traditional media organizations led by senior journalists follow good journalism Audience: National and
Global Contexts
principles, including the following.
13.3.1 On-Site Reporting
This particular challenge has cropped up with the emergence of new digital media, in which there is less and less original fieldwork reporting. It has been observed that most of the reporting is armchair or desk reporting, where reporters and correspondents do not go to the field but instead report from their desks. So much so that even TV reporting has taken a backseat when the anchor briefs the viewers from their offices. There is no doubt that field reporting involves considerable cost. Still, an absence of it deprives the viewers of the fundamental issues and hands-on experience that reporters get while talking to the victims and reporting the ambience of the incidents. Now, a large amount of reporting has become surveillance reporting, which is technologically driven. There is no substitute for fieldwork reporting as real issues, and the truth behind the news is put on the back burner.
13.3.2 Sourcing and Citiation Information
In the absence of fieldwork reporting, a good news reporter is expected to share the source of information without jeopardizing the safety and identity of its sources. As large numbers of news are simple facts, the reporters are expected to take the official versions from the authorities while, at the same time, talking to those who may be affected by such reports. Sourcing and citation of the information vary from news to news, and reporters should maintain self-censorship while filing their news reports.
13.3.3 Authenticity and Credibility
Authenticity and credibility of news are important criteria when judging the merit of the news. News that is not credible and authentic could create rumours, leading to serious losses of property and lives, especially when it is a sensitive issue. A news writer is expected to take a measured step and should verify the authenticity of news from all possible sources before publishing and broadcasting it. These two attributes are major indicators of the prestige and professionalism of media organizations.
13.3.4 Cross-Checking and Double-Checking Facts & Figures
This is the cardinal principle of good journalism, as it is based on facts. It has been observed that sometimes the facts and figures given by the government authorities could go wrong, and as a rule, reporters are expected to check, cross-check, and double-check the facts he/she is providing to the readers. Sometimes, old reports come in handy while validating the truthfulness of the information. It is always better to check the information from multiple sources and quote the source when there is an anomaly.
13.3.5 Non-Prejudicial
This is another subjective area in which a reporter must always be conscious. Many prejudices are subconsciously governed, which a reporter is unaware of and may pass on while writing or reporting an incident. All stereotypical depictions of people, religion and politics should be avoided and only be governed by the merit of the news that a reporter is reporting on. While describing a situation, some fashionable adjectives, adverbs and superlatives should be avoided; instead, a balanced report should be prepared. 243

MIL, Society and Ethics 13.3.6 Privacy and Confidentiality
There are definite rules and norms to safeguard the source's safety and security, which provides sensitive information to the reporters. You must have heard about Deep Throat's identity in the Watergate scandal. That was not revealed for many years as it could have compromised the person's safety. A reporter has to take special care to take due permission before quoting him/her in the report and maintain a confidentiality clause if asked by the individuals. Revealing the source's identity sometimes puts even the government in a precarious position.
13.4 THE POWER OF IMAGE IN NEWS REPORTING
The traditional media was constrained by limited space, so the scope to play up the pictorial elements was constricted. It was used to carry pictures of national leaders on important occasions or events. However, the pictorial and visual aspects have been amplified with digital media gaining unlimited space. A separate digital media, Instagram, emphasizes visual aspects, with political leaders and celebrities hogging the limelight with massive followers. As visuals are important aspects of storytelling and news reporting, they have carved a special place in the visual communication of the media. Let's look at some of the special features of photojournalism.
13.4.1 Visuals and Photographs: Impact and Response
News reporting is one of the main pillars of journalism, without which independent media would lose its relevance. There are various kinds of newspapers, magazines, TV Channels and digital media platforms that literature, social issues, religious issues and sports could drive. News reporting is one of the major strengths of newspapers, magazines, and TV channels, whose major strength lies in the news. One of the reasons that news reporting is a challenging task is that it entails heavy investment and vigilant adherence to the principle of reporting and ethical practices. More often than not, it must adhere to self-censorship and restrain inflammatory language lest it creates social whiplash. News reporting also creates social perception, which plays a major role in a news story's social, political and religious narration. How a news story is told, how the source portrays it, and how the readers receive it shapes the narrative and the image- portrayed event, community, policy and person. Before we discuss the power of the real image, let's first understand the creation of an image through a script or a story that assumes a dominant role in news reporting. The way a news reporter uses verbs, adjectives, and, at times, superlatives creates an image in readers' minds that could either affirm or negate his/her perception. The media portrayal sometimes reinforces pre-existing preferences or prejudices. Incidentally, this method of reporting is far removed from classical storytelling, which is mainly fact-based and devoid of personal perception. Despite these changes, news reporting from ground zero based on objectivity, neutrality, and unbiased attention continues to form the bedrock of good journalism. Good reporting also involves sustained and continuous follow-up of the event and painstakingly putting the small details into the larger whole to solve the puzzle. You must have read about the investigative reporting of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein for The Washington Post, who reported on the Watergate Scandal that led to the resignation of US President
244 Richard Nixon.

Audience: National and
Global Contexts
A team of Washington Post staff working on the Watergate Scandal. (Photo Courtesy: History Extra.com) In addition to the written script, which forms the main narrative of news stories, still pictures, videos and multimedia create their narrative. Let's see how some images have defined the period of angst and suffering and have so succinctly portrayed the events of their era. Take, for example, the image of Phan Thi Kim Phuc, known as "the girl in the picture", which was shot by Pulitzer Prize-winning AP photographer Nick Ut during the Vietnam War in 1972. The Girl in the Picture (Photo Courtesy: New York Times) The picture shows a 9-year-old girl running naked on the street with her back burnt, depicting atrocities on civilians. There is no word which can describe the suffering of the young girl. It is said that a picture is worth a thousand words. The picture was so traumatizing that the editors of the New York Times hesitated to publish it. But after much deliberation, it found a place on the paper's front page, thus drawing the world's attention to the sufferings of the Vietnam War. The picture has been adjudged the Picture of 1973. Another picture that merits mention is that of an Afghan girl named Sharbat Gula (Sharbat Bibi), which was published on the cover of National Geographic in June 1985. The picture was popularly called "the First World's Third World Mona Lisa" and was shot by National Geographic photojournalist Steve McCurry. The girl was photographed 245

MIL, Society and Ethics when she was 12 years old and was living in one of the refugee camps in Pakistan after the occupation of Afghanistan by the Soviets. The photograph is unusual for the clarity of facial expression that shows the grit of an Afghan girl staring at an uncertain future with broad, open eyes. National Geographic launched a campaign to search for the girl. She was finally located in her hometown in Afghanistan when she has photographed again in 2002, and the two photographs were juxtaposed against each other. First World's Third World Mona Lisa (Photo Courtesy: National Geographic) As seen in the case of Vietnamese girls and Afghan women, the sufferings of common people form the main narrative while depicting the impact of war and people's subsequent dislocation and migration. In the same league, the picture of a three-year- old Syrian toddler washed up on Turkey's beach in Bodrum on September 2, 2015, drew the world's attention towards Syrian refugees trying to escape the war-torn country. The lifeless drowned toddler with facedown was found after 12 Syrian refugees tried to make their way to the Greek island of Kos and died on their way. The toddler was later identified as Alan Kurdi, who had drowned with his 5-year-old brother. These refugees belonged to Kobani, a Syrian town under fire during the fight between Islamic State insurgents and Kurdish forces. The image was so evocative and expressive that it immediately caught the world's attention and became a trending picture on Twitter with the hashtag #KiyiyaVuranInsanlik (humanity washed ashore). The Syrian boy on Greece's Bodrum beach on September 2, 2015 (Photo Courtesy: Wikipedia)
13.4.2 Reporting for Audio and Visual Media
Audio and video files are two important digital media aspects conspicuously absent in 246 the earlier traditional media. Their reach and appeal have been so impressive that

dedicated digital spaces are assigned to them. At the same time, audio has been a Audience: National and
Global Contexts
special feature of radio and video that the TV; the two have seamlessly converged in the digital space. The podcast has emerged as one of the sought-after content for news, features, and discussion, which now most newspaper and TV websites have incorporated into their digital space. Depending on the nature of the news, podcasts are a series of audio files available to the readers, either free or subscription-based. A good media podcaster makes the subject interesting by simplifying it for common listeners by modulating his/her voice, sound pitch play and tone. The subjects of the podcasts vary from cinema to food to travel to news and entertainment. Some popular Indian podcasts include The Mythpat Podcast, Maed in India, Internet Said So, Ranveer Show, Tastes of India and In Focus by The Hindu. The expansion of telecom infrastructure and Internet penetration has further facilitated the reach of audio and video to a large group of a heterogeneous mass audience. Many news organizations have dedicated video channels on which they host their content and keep updating from time to time. Some of these videos are also on social media, where people pick them up. When many people access videos in a given period, they are said to go viral because of their accessibility and popularity. In fact, video has become the most widely watched content in today's media content. Many videos with the highest viewership numbers run in billions and belong to music, entertainment, and religious content genres. As the lifespan of news content is fleeting, it does not occupy a permanent slot in the highest viewership category.
13.4.3 Writing for Visual Media
The principle of good journalistic writing stands equally true for visual media, which means that the narration of the news story has to be simple, attractive and close to the readers who can identify themselves with the content of the medium. As mentioned earlier, the conversational tone of the script is most suitable for the medium. The sentences should be simple. A complex sentence should be broken into 8-10 words, with each sentence conveying a particular idea. The use of heavy words and jargon should be avoided as far as possible. The transition from one sentence to another should match the visual transition to be effective and communicative. As people's digital attention is flickering, it is best to begin the story with its most startling or unique aspect and then gradually shift to known facts. In most cases, viewers' attention and retention are the most critical aspects of video viewing. They should be given due attention by incorporating stunning visuals, graphics, and archival screenshots in the video library.
13.4.4 Leveraging the Visual Quotients
The visuals and video have the highest viewer quotients among all media content. It decides the priority of video content and should be leveraged accordingly. Video content should be placed at the right place and at the right time when there are chances they would be searched for on the subject. It should be rightly tagged and indexed with popular keywords on the subject. When the video content matches the searchable content, the video hosting site should be able to display it when required. The video content should be compelling and competent enough to draw viewers' attention. It should be watermarked to protect the ownership rights of the video and should be embedded. It is also advisable to create playlists so that viewers can continuously engage and subscribe to them for future engagement.

Activity - 2 Discuss reactions to images of people personally affected by tragedy or disaster. Research and reflect on the strategies journalists use in mainstream and alternative media to depict the emotional impact of events while maintaining people's privacy and dignity.
13.5 LEARNING ATTRIBUTES OF NEWS
REPORTING
The learning curve for news reporters continues lifelong. In addition to learning new methods of gathering news and using new technology, he/she has to ensure that the reports, features, and opinion pieces they write truly reflect the essence of the time. Some ethical questions about information sources must be addressed while maintaining the prevailing privacy laws. Certain self-restraint norms need to be followed depending on the subjects of the reporting - political, economic, sports, health, international affairs or crime. While reporting on the judiciary or court, the reporter has to ensure the decorum and dignity of the judges are maintained lest they are implicated in contempt of court. The reporter must also ensure that he/she gives the full and correct versions of all the parties involved in the report and should not favour one over the other. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are some of the good practices of news reporting?

2. What is the ideal way to include visual elements in news reporting?

13.6 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) In this unit, learners can research and analyze the news coverage of a major event, such as a man-made or natural disaster. This case study can focus on the images from news coverage and the representations of people and issues connected to these events. Learners can survey the Internet to locate the images that appeared in the mainstream media. Research and analyze the news coverage of major events such as man-made or natural disasters. This case study should focus on the images from news coverage and the representations of people and issues connected to these events. Educators can survey the Internet to locate the images that appeared in the mainstream media.

The following questions can be used to analyze the coverage and the images in detail: Audience: National and
Global Contexts
Describe what was represented in online news sites, television, and newspaper coverage. Identify the images that were used most often. Examine how these representations are constructed, considering the use of camera angles, the composition of a photograph, types of shots, who or what is shown in the footage/photograph and who or what is excluded. What message is conveyed through the use of these images? What story do the images tell? Assess the potential of these images to become iconic. What impact might these images have on audiences? Consider the effect of the images on the viewer's understanding of, or relationship to, the subject. Discuss whether or not information about the event that does not exist in images will be remembered. Explore the power of images to 'obliterate' other information not contained in visual form. What are the implications of this for informed citizenship?
13.7 LET US SUM UP
As mentioned earlier, news reporting is both an art and a science and has to be dealt with the humane and technological face. It is very responsible work and has the potential to make or mar the reputation of the news organization and the reporter. While the immediacy of the news has assumed a central role in the competitive news domain, the reporter has to ensure the accuracy of the news he/she is providing as it may impact some people negatively. Depending on the news medium, the style and presentation of news should be transformed accordingly. The news presentation must be simple, lucid, attractive and factual and should be presented so that even an illiterate person understands it. We also discussed the power of image while discussing news reporting. We realized it has a very high visual impact and should be given due importance wherever such visuals show compelling and empathetic elements. At the end of the Unit, we also discussed new methods and technology in news gathering. To survive in the competitive media space, a reporter has to constantly keep him/herself updated with new technological devices to improve his/her newsgathering skills.
13.8 KEYWORDS
Developing News : This news reporting group is closely associated with what we now call breaking news. In such news, there is no final; the news is still unfolding and needs continuous reporting with a timeline before reaching the outcome. URL : The Uniform Resource Locator is the address of a web page or a website on the World Wide Web. Television Rating : A measure of viewership of the TV news channels. Point (TRP)
13.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Agee K. Warren, Ault H. Phillip, Emery Edwin. 1983. Reporting and Writing the
News. New York: Harper and Row Publishers. 249

MIL, Society and Ethics 2. Arnold, George T. 1996. Media Writer's Handbook: A Guide to Common Writing
and Editing Problems. Dubuque, Iowa: Brown Publishers
3. Grover, A.N.. 1990. Press and Law. New Delhi: Vikas Publisher
4. Kamath, M.V. 1980. Professional Journalism. New Delhi. Vikas Publishing House
5. Mencher, Melvin. 1986. Basic News Reporting. Dubuque, Iowa: Brown Publishers
6. Shrivastava, K. M. 1987. News Reporting And Editing. New Delhi: Sterling
Publishers
7. Wolseley, Roland E (Ed.). 1953. Journalism In Modern India. Mumbai: Asia
Publishing House
13.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Newspapers and magazines have a different role because of their production
cycle. The next edition of the daily newspaper comes only 24 hours after you have received your newspapers early in the morning. As newspapers are not in a hurry to provide breaking news, they use the available time for in-depth reporting on the issue. A newspaper tries to find out the reason, the cause, and its impact on policies, people, the economy, and politics. Depending on the impact value of the news, some news makes it to the paper's front page while others recede to the inside pages.
2. TV news reporting is more complex and involves multiple professionals like
cameramen, Outdoor Broadcast Van (Ob Van), Liv U and Dejero, Satcom and Ingest and other infrastructure. Reporting on an event uses all forms of communication, including words, pictures, graphics, and video. It should be remembered that illiterate people also view TV news channels, so particular emphasis should be given to simplicity and clarity of expression, words and phrases. As a rule, such news should begin by providing the most crucial part of the information first, followed by less important and then least important parts in sequential order while narrating the story. The reporter and anchor are also advised to use simple, brief sentences and avoid ambiguity and incoherence while reporting events. For a TV reporter, it is also essential to understand the nature and profile of viewers to present news in a way easily understood by them.
3. Online and digital multimedia have significantly changed accessibility and reach
to readers and viewers. At the same time, it has diversified the mechanism of news reporting, thus involving the masses in the process. You must have seen a lot of videos and news alerts by common people posted on social media going viral, and the mainstream media subsequently taking up those feeds and reporting on it. Digital media enjoys a unique position because of its distinctive news reporting and dissemination features. Its segmented and customized features allow catering to different audience groups, whether the audience is literate or illiterate. Unlike TV and newspapers, it doesn't need much setup and operational cost and can be started by anyone with a meagre investment.

You must have seen many YouTubers and small and big journalist having their Audience: National and
Global Contexts
websites, blogs and YouTube channels running with decent followers and subscriber bases. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Some good practices of news reporting are:
On-Site Reporting
Sourcing and Citation Inputs
Authenticity and Credibility
Cross-Checking and Double-Checking Facts and Figures
Non-Prejudicial Reporting
Privacy and Confidentiality
2. The visuals and video have the highest viewer quotients among all media content.
It decides the priority of video content and should be leveraged accordingly. Video content should be placed at the right place and at the right time when there are chances they would be searched for on the subject. It should be rightly tagged and indexed with popular keywords on the subject. When the video content matches the searchable content, the video hosting site should be able to display it when required. The video content should be compelling and competent enough to draw viewers' attention. It should be watermarked to protect the ownership rights of the video and should be embedded. It is also advisable to create playlists so that viewers can continuously engage and subscribe to them for future engagement.

Block-4
Representation in India

BLOCK 4: REPRESENTATION IN MEDIA
In the previous three blocks, we have learnt the holistic approach of media literacy and its applications in learning, specifically on news operations. The smooth functioning of any operation requires rules, regulations and ethical considerations. These are more critically needed for media operations because of their influence and scale of operations across broad sections of society. This block will take you through many shades of these crucial aspects of media operations, which will help you broaden your understanding of media institutions.
Unit 14: Industry Codes on Diversity and Representation
Media is a robust platform that shapes our perceptions and understanding of the world. It's not just about what's presented but also about how it's represented. The codes governing representation in media, particularly regarding diversity, play a crucial role in ensuring fair and accurate portrayal. These Industry Codes on Diversity and Representation set the standards for inclusivity in media content, encompassing gender, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and more. They aim to challenge stereotypes, encourage authentic storytelling, and promote diversity both in front of and behind the camera. However, issues of representation persist. Media often grapples with underrepresentation, misrepresentation, and perpetuating harmful stereotypes. Consequently, these codes are indispensable for promoting responsible and equitable media practices. This unit highlights the significance of these Industry Codes of Diversity and Representation, shedding light on their role in fostering a more inclusive and representative media landscape.
Unit 15: Television, Films and Print Publishing
Television, films, advertising, and print publishing are potent platforms for storytelling, where representation takes centre stage. Issues of representation in these media forms are complex and multifaceted and significantly influence our perceptions and societal norms. Technical strategies in representation comprise a range of tools and techniques used to convey characters, cultures, and ideas. This includes casting choices, storytelling methods, and visual imagery that shape the narratives we consume. However, these industries often grapple with challenges related to underrepresentation, misrepresentation, and the perpetuation of stereotypes. The consequences of these issues ripple through society, reinforcing biases and limiting the voices and stories that are heard. In this unit, issues of representation in television, films, advertising, and print publishing are explored along with the technical strategies employed, the impact of representation on culture, and the ongoing efforts to promote more diverse, inclusive, and responsible media portrayals.
Unit 16: Representation and Music Videos
Music is cherished in Indian society, with its melodies echoing the diverse tapestry of cultures and regions. Music videos have gained unprecedented reach and popularity recently, transforming the music landscape and its profound connection with our society. A music video is a fusion of auditory and visual artistry, weaving together elements such as cinematography, choreography, and narrative storytelling to enhance the emotive power of music. These videos are not just a showcase of musical talent but also a reflection of our society's diverse segments, encapsulating cultural richness, social issues, and personal stories. They exert a substantial influence on societal norms. Parallelly,

Representation in India the alternative music industry has emerged as a platform for unconventional voices and genres. A critical analysis of music videos can unravel their artistic, cultural, and societal impact. This unit deals with music videos' cultural aspects and technical elements, emphasizing their role in reflecting and shaping the values, trends, and expressions of Indian society. Media literacy is an essential skill set in the contemporary scenario. It helps you to navigate through a highly populated media environment for the sake of making informed decisions. Media literate eventually becomes a watchdog's watchdog - which means media is supposed to monitor the performance of public institutions. Media literacy helps individuals to monitor the performance of powerful media institutions. Along with all four blocks, we hope this learning will broaden your role and responsibility with the multiple communication avenues.

Industry Codes on Diversity
UNIT 14 INDUSTRY CODES ON DIVERSITY
and Representation
AND REPRESENTATION
Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Representations and Presentations
14.2.1 Contextualising Identities
14.2.2 Defining Representation
14.2.3 Key Terms of Representation
14.3 Codes of Representations
14.3.1 Various Codes of Representation
14.3.2 Construction of Representation
14.3.3 Understanding the Language of the Internet
14.3.4 Unconventional Forms of Representation
14.4 Representation of Diversity in Media
14.4.1 Decoding Diversity
14.4.2 Social Markers of Identity Representation
14.4.3 Understanding Marginalisation and The Marginalised
14.5 Issues of Representation
14.5.1 Gender Portrayal and Sexualisation
14.5.2 Stereotyping
14.5.3 Sensationalism
14.5.4 Misrepresentation and Underrepresentation
14.5.5 Whitewashing
14.6 Pedagogical Approaches
14.7 Let Us Sum Up
14.8 Keywords
14.9 Further Readings
14.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
What we see - and don't see - in the media affects how we view reality. Media works can be imagined as mirrors reflecting an audience's experience. These windows give them access to experiences they otherwise wouldn't have known, or, in some cases, both. Representation in content or products can take many forms. Many of us live in an image-filled culture, and daily, we are surrounded by representations on television, feature films, news reporting, and books, both online and offline. This unit will highlight the different aspects of representation, issues of diversity and the importance of diverse representation in the media.

14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: define representation and the role of identity in media representations; understand the various codes of representation in the media; comprehend how representation is constructed in traditional and digital media; demonstrate the role of diversity in media representations; and explore the issues of media representation.
14.2 REPRESENTATIONS AND PRESENTATIONS
Reporters, authors, videographers, advertisers, publishers and filmmakers, bloggers, vloggers, producers of user-generated content, and people generally use images, audio, and written words to convey content. They usually face limitations of time, space, resources, and other editorial constraints to prepare and present stories to the public. Inevitably, they 'represent' people, issues, or events by signifying what they see as relevant, such as characteristics like race, gender, sexuality, age, or class. This selection sometimes involves stereotypical or oversimplified representations, which can be used to label individuals or groups and justify narrow beliefs and attitudes. This may or may not be the intention of the author, producer, or journalist/reporter. Sometimes, it is the recipient's interpretation (viewer, reader, or listener). Where speakers act as instruments of conflict, hate speech, or discrimination, it is logical that they should be accountable for their actions. At the same time, diversity and plurality of voices and content are internationally accepted. A balance must be struck that concern about representations does not chill diversity and that a plurality operates within the parameters of protected speech. We also need to understand that content providers work in a social context and are social actors within that social context. They are influenced by society and, in turn, influence society. We must look deeper into the national context within which particular libraries, archives, museums, media, and digital communication companies operate.
14.2.1 Contextualising Identities
As a construct, identity holds concepts such as class, ethnicity, gender, race, and sexuality. An individual's identity relies on multiple parameters and is highly subjective. However, the spectrum of identity depends on its representation. Moreover, identity has its denotations, i.e., how we view ourselves, and its connotations, i.e., how others view us. Identity is, therefore, a cultural construction and is external. This perspective is found in symbolic interactionism and social constructionism. In structural framings, identities are constituted through the subject's positioning through language. Moreover, identity as a construct is extremely fluid and varies according to the subject. An individual's relationship to his/her social role and its related expectations are internalised through socialisation. Identities are not given in terms of what individuals are as a whole but in terms of more or less arbitrarily selected features they possess. Mostly, individuals have little power

to choose what features will be used to identify them; they are determined socially Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation
from the outside. Stereotypes based on race, class, ethnicity, gender, and sexuality are created through representation.
14.2.2 Defining Representations
Various production processes generate representational texts in any medium, including the mass media. Representation involves:
1. How identities are constructed within the texts;
2. How the processes of production construct them to attract the attention of
the audience;
3. The reception of such representations by people.
The subjects are 'framed' according to the intent of the authorial intention. In a socio- historical context, representation refers to a cycle of processes of textual and meaning production and reception in which audiences interpret texts. Media representations are the mediated presentations of social realities. Thus, the media content 'represents' some other social aspects based on the narratives they form. All media content, including written and visual content, through which we make meaning/sense of those represented is called text. The study of representations becomes essential since they do not come with a single meaning. The same event can have multiple meanings and perspectives, sometimes "stereotypes" and sometimes conflicting with "binary oppositions" (Barthes, R.:1977; Hall, S.:1997). The process becomes more complicated when it comes to representations on the Internet. Here, the responsive text itself becomes a part of the media content. Although, essentially, it is seen as 'presentations' or "self-presentations," it becomes a "public text" (Illouz, E.:2007) in order to make a 'general representation'. Whether such a text represents the acceptance of 'difference/otherness' in the case of marginalised sections with intimacy is a matter of inquiry.
14.2.3 Key Terms of Representation
Some of the key terms of media representation are: Mediation: the process everything goes through before it reaches an audience. This can be how a film script is written and rewritten before it makes it to production, how newspaper or magazine photographs are cropped and captioned, or how real-life events - like a protest or a speech by a politician - are portrayed in a news report. Selection refers to what has been selected to include in a media text. This can be particularly important in newspaper articles, where selecting certain facts over others can change the angle of a story; what is omitted is sometimes as important as what is included. Anchorage: words that go along with images to give those pictures a certain meaning in a specific context. This includes captions and headlines in newspapers and taglines in adverts or on film posters. Ideology: a set of beliefs or values that shape how people view the world.

Representation in India Power: the ability to influence or control people and events, often seen in media representation through who is given a voice and who is excluded. Framing: how a story or issue is presented in the media. Marginalisation: relegating a group or individual to a lower or outer edge of society, often in the media. Othering: portraying someone or something as different, strange or alien. Stereotype: a widely held but oversimplified image or idea of a particular group of people or things. Misrepresentation: the incorrect or inaccurate portrayal of something in the media. Bias: a preference or prejudice in favour of or against one thing, person, or group compared with another. Tokenism: the practice of including only a small number of members of a minority group in media in order to appear diverse. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Define representation.

14.3 CODES OF REPRESENTATIONS
14.3.1 Various Codes of Representation
The codes of media representation refer to the techniques and conventions that media producers use to create meaning and convey messages to their audiences. Some of the prominent codes of media representation are: Visual codes This includes using colour, lighting, camera angles, composition, and other visual elements to convey meaning. Audio codes This includes using music, sound effects, and dialogue to convey emotion, set the tone, and reinforce messages. Symbolic codes This includes using symbols, metaphors, and other abstract representations to convey meaning. Technical codes This includes editing, special effects, and other technical aspects of media production 260 to create a specific style or mood.

Written codes Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation
This includes language, tone, and style in written media such as news articles, opinion pieces, and blogs. Cultural codes This includes using cultural references, stereotypes, and norms to convey meaning and create a shared understanding among audiences. Performance codes This includes using acting, movement, and other forms of performance to convey emotion and messages.
14.3.2 Construction of Representation
Constructing a representation of different identities heavily depends on the media form. For example, in print, representation can be constructed based on:
Layout and Design
Language and Mode of Address
Camera shots and angles in any photographs Visual codes Anchorage Similarly, in audio-visual mediums, including television and cinema, the following attributes affect the construction of representation: Casting: The actors and actresses selected to portray characters in media can significantly impact how those characters are represented. Casting choices can affect the physical appearance, personality, and behaviour of characters and the overall diversity and representation of the media. Writing and storytelling: How characters are written and portrayed in media can shape the audience's perceptions and understanding of different groups of people. Storylines, dialogue, and characterisation can all contribute to how characters are represented in media. Figure 1: High and low-angle camera shots (Source: Paligui, CC BY-SA 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) 261

Representation in India Camera shots and angles: A low-angle camera shot can make someone seem more powerful and in control than they are, while a high-angle shot of the same person may make them seem less important or influential. Cinematography and visual design: How media is filmed and presented visually can also contribute to representing characters and groups. Camera angles, lighting, and colour choices can all affect how the audience perceives characters. Editing and post-production: Media producers can manipulate the audience's emotions by representing certain characters or situations through editing. How it is edited will determine how the characters are represented and how the audience responds to them. Marketing and promotion: The way that media is marketed and promoted can also affect representation. Marketing materials like trailers and posters can shape the audience's expectations and perceptions of the media and its characters. Overall, representation in media is a complex and multifaceted process involving various creative decisions and techniques. Media creators need to be mindful of the impact of their choices on representation and strive for accurate, diverse, and inclusive representation in their work. Activity - 1 Select one mainstream film and analyse the representation based on the abovementioned attributes. Compare the analysis with a film from alternative cinema.
14.3.3 Understanding the Language of the Internet
The Internet is a platform to access and create 'new' content along with the existing content of traditional 'mainstream' media. Since the representations are 'mediated,' they are 'produced' in one perspective rather than its entirety. For example, the Barthesian concept of the simulacrum or 'representation through filters'. Similarly, various scholars claim that reality does not exist in one form; it is contextual and open to multiple interpretations (Derrida:1970; Barthes:1973; Baudrillard:1991; Hall:1997). So, in order to understand the representation of 'multiple social realities' on the Internet, we have to read the content as text. The text is read for media processes such as - Framing and priming: Positioning subjects/stories in an intended way so that they may be understood in a particular way. Labelling and stereotyping: Presenting the subject/event with one particular 'fixed' perspective. De-legitimisation and ex-nomination: While de-legitimisation constructs the categories of groups to exclude them from society, the process of ex- nomination 'un-name' the dominating groups to "naturalise" their domination in society. Intertextuality: Cross-referencing of the conventions and visual styles in media content.

With this, the comments/responses and posts on the Internet create the part of discourse Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation
as supplementary/complementary to the mainstream content. Another question is whether it really makes a mark as 'mainstream' content to represent the marginalised section. Is there any impact of local content on a large scale? On SNSs like Facebook, Twitter performance is counted on two key factors - "speed and engagement time" (Hill and Bradshaw:2019). With this, the impact of online content can be called a "change of the second order" where 'revolution' passes at a pace (Radhakrishnan,
2007) . Thus, the 'medium' transforms representations into the 'post-representational
state'. Immersion of this type establishes the dominance of the medium over the message and sometimes takes us far away from reality. "They give expression to - and also diminish - our consciousness" (Radhakrishnan: 2007). Machine-driven language is also analysed quantitatively for representation using software and programs such as Google Analytics, one of the popular websites for statistics services. It tracks and measures online traffic to learn patterns. However, the data- mining programs, descriptive mapping of densities, or social network analysis such as Ncapture, R Programming, or Word Cloud do not tell us about the nature of the representation nor the "personal information field" as constituted online (Srivathsan,
2007) . Moreover, data networking through forwards, shares, likes, viral videos, and
hashtags cannot guarantee the representation of marginalised sections since ideological processes are embedded or hidden. For example, computer-generated images through mathematical processing can create 'virtual/simulated reality' or peer-to-peer (P2P) file-sharing without detection. Qualitative data analysis software like Nvivo is now being developed to analyse online content.
14.3.4 Unconventional Forms of Representation
As representations are perspectives or "frames of understanding" (Hall:1997), the mainstream media is often blamed for supporting only the dominant frame by excluding or misrepresenting the marginalised. The Marxists and political-economic theorists have this view. Recently, with more "intensive" communication flow, "extensive" networking, and "less controllable" visibility coming from all over the Internet, the representation is not coming from top to bottom anymore (Thompson:2005 cited in Orgad:2012). Therefore, the Internet is being investigated to study unconventional forms of representation where local social identities are being studied to know the differences and processes of marginalisation on a global scale. Microblogging / Blogging / Video-blogging: Although personal perspectives in the form of articles were always been a part of traditional media, they have become an integral part of social media as blogs, vlogs, and microblogs. Unlike traditional media, the Internet provides a free platform for all 'private persons' to publish a blog globally. While the previous is known for formal structure and 'authority,' blogs and microblogs on the Internet are non-formal - an innovative form of fact-fiction-drama- documentary- commentary-all in the "public mediated realm" (Orgad:2012). Being the 'legitimate alternative text,' this content influences the traditional media (Woodly, 2008; Singer, 2014; Srivastava & Roy, 2016). However, the open gateways do not guarantee the participation of marginalised voices. Today, when we get our worldview through the Internet converging the traditional forms of media, we cannot forget that blogs are essentially personal accounts and can trap us in 'manipulated representations', especially in the absence of the 'fact-checking' tools (Silverstone: 2007; Orgad:2012). Gaming: Online games provide a fine example of the narrative construct based on technology and social structures (Murray, H.:1997). Close observation tells us how 263

Representation in India symbolically they form or take the path of personal stories, experiences, and life cycles based in real-time and situations. Panikkar (2007) emphasises the role of carefully designed gaming ecosystems: "The furious pace at which information is coded and transmitted has the virtue of making information generation and communication far more democratic. This can help hitherto powerless groups level the playing field as far as their capacity to reach and influence broader audiences." Animation: On digital platforms, as a "sophisticated and flexible medium," animation provides filmmakers/content creators freedom of creativity (Wells, P.:1998). According to Mirium Harris, Lily Husbands, and Paul Taberham (2019), an expansion in broader perspectives is expected with more 'experiments' in animation online. The power of animation lies in the fact that it calls for the total attention of the viewer, hence impacting their sensibilities immensely. Recently, with 2D/3D computer animation, filmmakers have been experimenting with unconventional plots to touch upon the lives of the marginalised with individual narratives. Most such films are accessible freely on the Internet. Figure 2: Meme on project discussions on Wikipedia (Source: Wiki-shitposting, CC BY 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) Similarly, there are unconventional forms, such as memes. This "user-driven imitation and remixing" practice continuously occupies online space (Shifman, L:2014). These simulating ecosystems call upon audiences for immersion and are an effective medium to highlight the conditions/issues concerning the marginalised. Indeed, genuine participation is the key. Activity - 2 Explore more alternative and unconventional forms of representation and make a list. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are some of the codes of representation?

2. How is representation constructed in print media?

264

3. What are some of the unconventional forms of representation? Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation

14.4 REPRESENTATION OF DIVERSITY IN MEDIA
14.4.1 Decoding Diversity
Diversity in media representation refers to the representation of people from different backgrounds, identities, and experiences in media, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, ability, religion, and age. It involves creating a range of characters and storylines that reflect the diversity of the real world and ensuring everyone is represented fairly and accurately. Diversity in media representation aims to ensure that all individuals have access to media that reflects their experiences and perspectives and to provide opportunities for marginalised groups to see themselves represented in positive and empowering ways. This can help to promote understanding and respect across different groups and to challenge stereotypes and discrimination. Some of the ways to ensure diverse representation in media are: Hiring diverse creators and decision-makers: One of the most important ways to ensure diverse representation is to involve a diverse group of creators and decision-makers in the media production process. This includes writers, producers, directors, and executives. A diverse team can bring a range of perspectives and experiences to the table, which can help to ensure that the final product is inclusive and representative. Conducting research: Conducting research on the audience and their needs, preferences, and demands can help media creators understand the demographics and interests of their audience. This can help creators to better understand what kind of representation is needed in their media. Figure 3: Gender Roles (Source: Myotus, CC BY-SA 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) 265

Representation in India Being mindful of stereotypes: Media creators should be mindful of stereotypes and actively work to avoid perpetuating harmful and inaccurate portrayals of different groups. Instead, they should work to create complex, nuanced characters that reflect the diversity of the real world. Seeking feedback: It's important to seek feedback from members of the communities being represented to ensure that the media accurately reflects their experiences and does not perpetuate stereotypes or inaccuracies. Training and resources: Media companies can provide training and resources to their staff to help them better understand and represent diverse groups. This can include sensitivity training, workshops, and access to resources such as cultural consultants. By taking these steps, media creators can help ensure that their work is inclusive, accurate, and representative of diverse experiences and perspectives.
14.4.2 Social Markers of Identity Representation
The social markers of identity representation are the different categories and characteristics individuals use to identify themselves and are often represented in media. Identity can be socially understood under the following categories: Race and ethnicity refer to categorising individuals based on physical and cultural characteristics. Gender and sexuality: This refers to the categorisation of individuals based on their biological sex and sexual orientation. Class refers to categorising individuals based on their economic and social status. Age: This refers to categorising individuals based on their chronological age and perceived life stage. Religion refers to categorising individuals based on their religious beliefs and practices. Disability refers to categorising individuals based on their physical, mental, or sensory impairments. Nationality and citizenship: This refers to categorising individuals based on their country of origin or citizenship status. Media representation of these social markers of identity can significantly impact how society perceives and treats individuals. Accurate and respectful representation can help promote understanding and acceptance, while inaccurate or negative representation can perpetuate stereotypes and contribute to discrimination and marginalisation. Activity - 3 Choose ten print news reports from 2 newspapers. Analyse how the social markers of identity representation are identified and construed in the news reports across different newspapers.
14.4.3 Understanding Marginalisation and the Marginalised
The term marginalised is derived from the word 'margin', which means something at the periphery or fringe. It is an identity resulting from the process of marginalisation.

We can understand the relative concepts of 'exclusion and inclusion' through the process. Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation
While social inclusion makes people or individuals participate in social-economic- political activities and provides a sense of importance, exclusion deprives them of it. The marginalised groups or individuals may lack reach and easy access to various socio-economic resources such as food, health, education, employment, social security, etc. Various measurement indexes, such as the Human Development Index (HDI) and Multidimensional-based Poverty Index (MPI), have been developed by global agencies that look at marginalised sections based on various parameters. According to Carolyn
Kagan and Mark
H. Burton (2005) states, "Little control over lives and resources, marginalised may
become stigmatised and are often at the receiving end of negative public attitudes." The process thus results in the socio-psychological effects of being 'not important'. Because of the feeling of alienation, people/ individuals feel themselves as 'marginalised' with 'no voice'. Marginalisation also means being in a 'position of powerlessness' in the political process. Here, the terms 'reach and access' and 'social exclusion' are seen in power relationships. Thus, the process includes "Oppression, exclusion, vulnerability, or discrimination. [It] is the idea of identity [given] by others in the interest of the dominant groups in society" (Kagan & Burton, 2005). In a condition of social exclusion, the marginalised "Lack effective participation in key activities or benefits of the society in which they live'' (Razer et al. as cited in Mowat, J. G.: 2015) due to the "Barriers that block the attainment of livelihoods, human development, and equal citizenship" (Alakhunova et al.:2015). Thus, if we take the degree of 'access' 'inclusion' and 'participation' of groups or individuals in socio-economic-political decision-making as indicators of the process of marginalisation, the concept of marginalised as an 'identity' is "a social construct - different in time and space" (Sharma, R.:2018) and comes in layers. It may be based on economic-political exclusion and/or social inequality, "Having 'powerful, negative impacts' on [a person's] everyday life" (Pachankis as cited in Sharma: 2018). Madsen (2006) expounds on marginalisation at three different levels, i.e. "The approach to the individual; his social and cultural conditions; and the complex interplay between people and their social environment" (cited in StorO, 2013). Therefore, "marginalised" is contextual, situational, and relational. For instance, there are marginalised individuals within dominant groups and dominant individuals within the marginalised communities. Crime victims (both men and women), patients without health facilities, children without education, and "All those struggling for a day-to-day decent life are marginalised despite their caste/religion affiliations" (Sharma, 2018). Similarly, "As life cycle stages change, risk of marginalisation increases or decreases" (Kagan and Burton: 2005). This means there needs to be a continuous effort to locate and remove the chances of marginalisation in a full circle and to create conditions for mainstreaming by increasing the chances of participation of all in the total socio-economic-political spheres. The Internet certainly provides us with a platform for networking in this direction. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.

Representation in India 1. What are the social markers of identity representation?

2. What do you understand by marginalisation?

14.5 ISSUES OF REPRESENTATION
14.5.1 Gender Portrayal and Sexualisation
The portrayal of gender in the media has been a topic of debate for many years. Gender is often portrayed in the media in stereotypical and limiting ways, which can reinforce harmful gender norms and perpetuate inequality. Here are some common examples of how gender is often portrayed in media: Gender stereotypes: Media often portrays men and women in stereotypical roles, such as men as strong and dominant and women as nurturing and submissive. Similarly, men are portrayed to be strong and assertive, while women are portrayed as passive and emotional. These stereotypes can reinforce gender norms and restrict individuals from fully expressing themselves. Objectification: Women are often objectified and depicted as sexual objects rather than complex individuals with their agency. Objectification and sexualisation of women can reinforce harmful attitudes toward women and promote a culture of harassment and violence. Toxic masculinity or hyper-masculinity: Men are often portrayed as hyper- masculine, with an emphasis on physical strength, aggression, and dominance. Media also often promotes toxic masculinity, which can lead to harmful behaviours such as aggression, violence, and a lack of emotional expression. Gender binary: The media often presents a binary understanding of gender, reinforcing the idea that there are only two genders and that they are inherently opposite and complementary. Lack of representation: Women and non-binary individuals are often underrepresented in media, both on-screen and behind the scenes. This lack of representation can perpetuate the idea that certain genders are less important or less capable. Intersectionality: The intersection of gender with other social markers of identity, such as race, sexuality, and class, can result in unique forms of representation and marginalisation. It's important to note that there has been progress in recent years, with more diverse and nuanced representations of gender in media, including the rise of feminist and LGBTQ+ media. However, much work must be done to create media that truly reflects the diversity and complexity of gender identities and experiences. To address these issues, media creators must be mindful of how gender is portrayed. This includes creating more diverse and complex characters, challenging gender

stereotypes, and avoiding the objectification of women. It also involves actively working Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation
to include more women and non-binary individuals in media production and decision- making roles. By doing so, media creators can help to promote more positive and inclusive attitudes towards gender in society. Activity - 4 Select five audio-visual ads and analyse closely how gender is portrayed in the advertisements chosen. Understand the context of gender representation using elements of colour tone, dialogue, dress/attire, profession, type of advertisement, product advertising, music, picturisation, camera angles, and props.
14.5.2 Stereotyping
Stereotyping refers to making assumptions or generalisations about a group of people based on their perceived characteristics or attributes, such as their race, gender, religion, or nationality. Stereotypes can be positive, negative, or neutral but are often oversimplified and based on incomplete or inaccurate information. Stereotyping can lead to the formation of biases and prejudice, which can harm individuals and society as a whole. It can result in discrimination, exclusion, and marginalisation of certain groups and can perpetuate inequality and injustice. Stereotypes in the media are created in a variety of ways. Here are some common factors that contribute to the creation of stereotypes: Lack of representation: When certain groups of people are underrepresented in the media, it can lead to stereotypes and misconceptions about those groups. For example, if a particular race or ethnicity is consistently portrayed negatively or stereotypically in the media, it can reinforce harmful attitudes and biases. Simplification of characters: To tell a compelling story, media creators often simplify characters by emphasising certain traits and downplaying others. However, this can sometimes lead to the creating of one-dimensional, stereotypical characters. Cultural norms: Media is often influenced by cultural norms and beliefs about what is considered "normal" or "acceptable" behaviour for certain groups. This can lead to the perpetuation of stereotypes and the reinforcement of harmful attitudes and biases. Commercial interests: Media companies often prioritise commercial interests over social responsibility, which can create stereotypical characters and storylines designed to appeal to a broad audience. Lack of diversity in media production: When media production teams are not diverse, it can lead to a lack of perspective and understanding about different groups of people, contributing to stereotypes. To address the creation of stereotypes in media, it is important to have diverse representation on and off-screen, challenge harmful cultural norms, and prioritise social responsibility over commercial interests. This can help to create more complex and nuanced characters that reflect the diversity of the real world and challenge harmful stereotypes. It is important to recognise and challenge stereotypes in order to promote understanding and respect across different groups. This involves being aware of our biases and 269

Representation in India assumptions, seeking out accurate information about different groups, and avoiding using labels or generalisations to describe individuals or groups. We can create a more equitable and just society by challenging stereotypes and promoting diversity and inclusion.
14.5.3 Sensationalism
Sensationalism in the context of media representation refers to using shocking or exaggerated stories and images to attract and maintain audience attention, often at the expense of accuracy and objectivity. Sensationalism can take many forms in media, including: Tabloid journalism: This refers to the practice of sensationalising news stories, often with a focus on celebrity gossip, scandals, and other salacious details. Clickbait refers to using attention-grabbing headlines or images to entice people to click on articles or videos, often without providing meaningful or accurate content. Fear-mongering refers to using sensationalised stories to stoke fear and anxiety in the audience, often with a political or ideological agenda. Overdramatisation: This refers to the exaggeration of events or emotions in order to create a more compelling narrative, often at the expense of accuracy and nuance. Sensationalism in media can have negative impacts on individuals, groups, and society as a whole. It can lead to the spread of misinformation, the perpetuation of stereotypes, and the exploitation of vulnerable people and communities. Additionally, it can contribute to a culture of fear and anxiety and undermine trust in journalism and media more broadly.
14.5.4 Misrepresentation and Underrepresentation
Misrepresentation in media occurs when certain groups of people are portrayed inaccurately or negatively in media content, such as movies, television shows, news reports, and advertisements. This can include stereotypes, caricatures, and other harmful portrayals that perpetuate negative biases and prejudices. Underrepresentation in media occurs when certain groups of people are not adequately represented in media content, such as movies, television shows, news reports, and advertisements. This can include groups such as women, people of colour, members of the LGBTQ+ community, people with disabilities, and other marginalised groups. Underrepresentation can lead to a lack of diverse perspectives and experiences in media, which can perpetuate stereotypes and biases. Both misrepresentation and underrepresentation in media can have significant negative impacts on individuals and communities, including reinforcing harmful stereotypes, limiting opportunities for representation and visibility, and perpetuating systemic inequalities. Media creators need to strive for accurate and diverse representation in their content.
14.5.5 Whitewashing
Whitewashing is a term used to describe the practice of casting white actors in roles that were originally intended for characters of colour or ethnic minorities. This can

occur in movies, television shows, and other forms of media. Whitewashing can also Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation
refer to the process of modifying or erasing the ethnic or cultural identity of a character in order to make them more palatable or relatable to a white audience. The practice of whitewashing is often criticised for perpetuating systemic racism and reinforcing stereotypes and biases. It can also limit opportunities for actors and actresses of colour and contribute to a lack of diverse representation in media. In recent years, there has been increased awareness and activism around the issue of whitewashing, with calls for more diverse and accurate representation in the media. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are some of the issues of gender portrayal in the media?

2. How do you distinguish between misrepresentation and underrepresentation?

14.6 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) Some of the pedagogical approaches that teachers and learners can adapt for this unit are: Collect ten news reports, 5 TV news reports and one film and analyse the following:
1. Typical representations of the "other" in content often fall into particular
categories, including the sexualised, the exotic, the dangerous, the humorous, and the pitiful. How common are these representations today? Are there other categories that appear in the content that are not listed here? Are these representations associated with particular gender groups (including women, men, and LGBTQI+)?
2. How are these portrayals constructed? What are the technical elements
that have been chosen? How do they reinforce content?
3. What is the message that is conveyed through these representations?
Who benefits if the message is accepted? Who loses?
4. How easy is it to find mainstream or alternative media examples that
break or go against a stereotype and provide more complex portraits of an individual or a group? Search for gender equality, minority groups, and other themes of interest to you. What do you find?
5. To what extent are various voices present in the content you use or create?
Why might this be the case? What impact do the voices that are present have on particular audiences? What is the impact of the absence of certain voices? 271

Representation in India 6. When deciding how to "represent" yourself online or in your media and digital content creations, what factors do you consider? How do you determine what factors are important?
7. Describe the characteristics of a media platform that embeds the principles
of diversity, equity, inclusion and fair representations of our global village. What are the potential uses and effects of such a platform? Research the codes of practice/ethical guidelines that exist in your region. They could relate to media, digital communications companies, libraries, archives, and museums. Identify who is responsible for creating these codes of practice. Summarise the key areas that are included and explain their purpose. How do they support the interests of citizens and consumers? What effect can these regulations have on the institutions involved? Apply the code of practice to representations in news reporting, content development and dissemination from the previous exercise. Assess to what extent the regulations are being followed. Be sure to consider both the text and the context in your assessment. Give specific examples from the coverage to support your response. When content violates the regulations, what recourse is available to individuals? Examine other areas of the various content providers covered by these codes (e.g. gender portrayal, including stereotypes and sexualisation in advertising). Assess to what extent the regulations are being followed. Outline the feedback you would give to these texts' institutions and/or producers.
14.7 LET US SUM UP
This unit has tried to highlight that media producers have the power to reach a mass audience. Along with this power to influence comes the responsibility to be conscious and careful of how they represent individuals and groups in the society in which we live. In all its forms, media has immense power to shape ideas. Television, films and digital media can influence how we see others and ourselves. Accurate, authentic representation can break down barriers, open us to new ideas, create powerful role models, and even inspire us. While the issues of representation persist in all media forms, the representation of marginalised and 'othered' communities can be handled sensitively by media producers. Moreover, the liability lies with the content creators and curators to consider all social identity markers and represent a diverse and wholesome picture of individuals and communities.
14.8 KEYWORDS
Representation : Media representation refers to how various forms of media, such as television shows, films, news programs, and social media, depict or portray certain groups of people or events. Media representation can shape our perceptions, attitudes, and beliefs about individuals, communities, and social issues.

Framing : Positioning subjects/stories in an intended way so that Industry Codes on Diversity
and Representation
they may be understood in a particular way. Codes of Representation : Media representation refers to the techniques and conventions that media producers use to create meaning and convey messages to their audiences. Stereotyping : Presenting the subject/event with one particular 'fixed' perspective.
14.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Dines, G., & Humez, J. M. (Eds.). (2014). Gender, race, and class in media:
A critical reader. SAGE Publications.
2. Hall, S. (1997). Representation: Cultural representations and signifying
practices. SAGE.
3. Louw, E., Carah, N. (2015). Media and Society: Production, Content and
Participation. United Kingdom: SAGE Publications.
4. Metykova, M. (2017). Diversity and the Media. United Kingdom: Macmillan
Education UK.
14.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Media representation refers to how various forms of media, such as television
shows, films, news programs, and social media, depict or portray certain groups of people or events. Media representation can shape our perceptions, attitudes, and beliefs about individuals, communities, and social issues. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Some of the codes of media representation are:
Visual codes Audio codes Symbolic codes Technical codes Written codes Cultural codes Performance codes
2. In print, representation can be constructed based on:
Layout and Design
Language and Mode of Address

Representation in India Camera shots and angles in any photographs Visual codes Anchorage
3. Some of the unconventional forms of representation are:
Microblogging Video-blogging Animation Gaming Memes Check Your Progress: 3
1. Some of the social markers of identity representation are:
Race and ethnicity Gender and sexuality Class Age Religion Disability Nationality and citizenship
2. Marginalisation is relegating a group or individual to a lower or outer edge of
society, often in the media. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Some of the issues of gender portrayal in the media are:
Gender stereotypes Objectification Toxic masculinity or hyper-masculinity Gender binary Lack of representation Intersectionality
2. On the one hand, misrepresentation in media occurs when certain groups of
people are portrayed inaccurately or negatively in media content, such as movies, television shows, news reports, and advertisements. On the other hand, underrepresentation in media occurs when certain groups of people are not adequately represented in media content, such as movies, television shows, news reports, and advertisements.

Industry Codes on Diversity
UNIT 15 TELEVISION, FILMS, AND PRINT
and Representation
PUBLISHING
Structure
15.0 Introduction
15.1 Learning Outcomes
15.2 Platforms of Mass Media
15.3 Television as a Medium of Mass Communication
15.3.1 Features of the Medium
15.3.2 Television Industry of India
15.3.3 Issues of Representation on Television
15.4 Films as a Medium of Mass Communication
15.4.1 Features of the Medium
15.4.2 Film Industry of India
15.4.3 Issues of Representation in Films
15.5 Print Publishing as a Medium of Mass Communication
15.5.1 Features of the Medium
15.5.2 Publishing Industry of India
15.5.3 Issues of Representation in Print
15.6 Gender Representation in Advertising
15.7 Technical Strategies in Representation
15.8 Pedagogical Approaches
15.9 Let Us Sum Up
15.10 Keywords
15.11 Further Readings
15.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
15.0 INTRODUCTION
In this unit, you will be introduced to three different platforms of mass media: TV, Film, and print publishing. We will discuss their features one by one as ways of mass communication and explore the status of all three industries as existing in India. Owing to their popularity with the masses. We will also discuss their social impact through representations and inclusion of various segments of society based on gender, religion, sexuality, etc., in the narratives on these media. We will later cover gender representation in the advertising industry as well, as no media format today is untouched by advertising. Lastly, we will ponder upon a few of the technical strategies adopted by producers for creating content for representation.
15.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: describe television, films and print publishing as media of mass communication;

Representation in India distinguish between their features; comment on their existing industries in India; discuss issues of representation exclusive to these media; observe gender representation in advertising, and analyse technical strategies in representation.
15.2 PLATFORMS OF MASS MEDIA
Imagine if you had to communicate to a large section of the population simultaneously; what tools would you use? Announce a sale, inform about a health hazard, or invite people to vote; how would you do it? There are a multitude of mediums available to us, plurally called the media. You may use a telephone to call a friend and an email to write to your boss. Similarly, mass media are the tools for communicating to a large population, not a singular entity. These media are used to spread information, education, and entertainment. Earlier in the times of kings and queens, there used to be a drummer and an announcer who roamed around the streets of the cities, visiting village to village to spread the king's message. Today's Mass media includes varied platforms suitable to different populations and customisable according to different messages. Print media relies on the written word and uses paper in the form of books, newspapers, magazines, etc., to disseminate information. Electronic media encapsulates Radio and Television, catering to many listeners and viewers, respectively. New media entails the medium of the Internet, accessible through computers, smartphones, tablets and laptops and opening the world of websites and apps. In this unit, we will discuss the three most popular media of mass communication in India: Film, TV and Print.
15.3 TELEVISIONS AS A MEDIUM OF MASS
COMMUNICATION
You might have heard from your parents or grandparents about the early days of television when the streets used to be deserted when Ramayana and Mahabharata aired on Doordarshan. You may also recall adjusting your meal times with your family during your childhood based on the schedule of a popular TV show. Even today, the living rooms of most households in India would have a television and more in bedrooms, depending on the economic stature of the family. According to numbers as well, Television has the highest penetration in India. But what is it that makes Television so popular? Is it the enchanting visuals that make it so captivating or the immediacy of the medium that makes it so fascinating? Or is the accompanying audio that transports a viewer to far corners of the world or instantly changes the mood? Let us discuss the features of the medium in detail.
15.3.1 Features of the Medium
1. Television is an audio-visual medium. It caters to two senses simultaneously,
auditory and visual senses, thus engaging the audience in more ways than one.

Because of this, consuming television programming is an easy and effortless Television, Films,
Print Publishing
process for the viewers.
2. Television is a domestic medium. You are not leaving the comfort of your
house to watch television like in the case of films, outdoor media and live events. You can enjoy it in the company of your family as well.
3. Television is a live medium. Whether the Olympics or the Republic Day parade,
television can instantly transport you to another space with the help of its audio and visuals. People will opine that it is much better to watch a match on TV rather than in the stadium due to the availability of close-ups, replays and live commentary.
4. Television is a dynamic medium. While the newspaper is published once a
day and radio news bulletins also run quickly, television news can be updated regularly. You may recall reporters stating that new facts have been gathered and are being added, popularly known as 'Breaking news'.
5. Television is an expensive medium. While earning revenue from advertising
primarily, Television production is more expensive than many other mass media formats. It takes cameras, sets, audio equipment and several skilled personnel to create a bit of programming.
15.3.2 Television Industry of India
The Indian Television industry comprises several television channels owned by government organisations and the private sector. From Doordarshan as the first Television channel in 1959, with a broadcast schedule that lasted only a few hours a day, to private channels today running 24*7, which only focuses on telemarketing, the Indian TV industry has come a long way. The privatisation of broadcasting in 1991 brought several international players to the Indian market, such as Star and CNN, and slowly exposed the audience to global content. Today, the country has around 900 television channels spanning multiple languages in various regions. It is one of the largest industries in India, with an estimated turnover of
1083 Billion Rupees in the year 2020-21 (Statista, 2021). But in recent times, the
continued expansion of the television broadcast industry has been impeded by the rising popularity of the OTT (Over The Top) platforms since the COVID lockdown period. These platforms are accessible through the Internet, and a large audience moved towards them for easy consumption amidst a disrupted life. Activity - 1 Search the Internet for the type of television channels in India. Then, list the five most-watched television channels and identify their historical publishing, content, ownership patterns and revenue models.
15.3.3 Issues of Representation on Television
Many of us would relate to the joy of finding a character whose mannerisms, beliefs or actions are personally relatable. We all have been excited to find someone from the same community or city on the hot seat of the popular television show Kaun Banega Crorepati. With the latitude of popularity of the medium, it becomes only natural to

Representation in India emulate and idolise people you see on the screen. In this case, it can be easily concluded that television has been an influential part of life for a large population. Many research studies in the area have concluded that a person's worldview is also affected by the television programming he or she is exposed to, either directly or indirectly. In this case, misrepresenting and underrepresenting characters from various sections of society can be a worrying matter. Stereotypes are a set of rules imposed upon certain communities or groups of people and thus result in a biased representation or misrepresentation of the community. For example, the daily soaps on TV channels have been showcasing female characters only as housewives. Exposure to the popular saas-bahu dramas has shaped the perception of women in the audience. They strive to be or to have women in the family who are as pious, religious, mild-mannered and good-looking as those seen on the screen. Watching these shows, one could also point out the vamp and the heroine with ease due to their stereotyped dressing style. Underrepresentation would be a lack of certain characters on screen. For example, you could not recall a dark, more than average weighted character on any of the TV shows. Neither would you be able to recall a character who is transgender or homosexual. Even if you can think of an example, they are likely not the story's protagonist. Being an immensely popular medium, television programming underrepresents many communities and makes them feel side-lined. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the features of Television as a medium of mass communication?

2. What are two primary issues in representation on Television?

15.4 FILMS AS A MEDIUM OF MASS
COMMUNICATION
Can you recall your favourite film star endorsing some brand in an advertisement? Or a popular song converted into a bhajan, played during religious festivities? Or actors beyond their prime joining politics and campaigning for other politicians? This is the power of cinema; it touches all walks of life in India and affects the masses in ways unimaginable. From fashion to lifestyle to travel destinations, films are responsible for effortlessly shaping the milieu's mindset. But looking closely, films are one art form highly dependent on technology. Ranging from film cameras to shoot, to edit bays to edit and lastly to the projection room to be screened in front of the audience, films are a sum of efforts of multiple technicians to create a piece of art. Derived from many

other media formats, such as script from literature, background score from music, Television, Films,
Print Publishing
performance from theatre, cinematography from photography or even painting, films not only provide an escape from daily life, they transport the audience into a fantasy world, taking them on a ride for next 3 hours.
15.4.1 Features of the Medium
Following are a few features of the medium:
1. Film is a mass medium. Reaching out to all the people sitting in the theatre at
the same time, films cater to the masses. Additionally, they are released on multiple screens across the country or even multiple devices through OTT platforms nowadays.
2. Films are a mechanical art form. They are shot on film strips that are exposed
to light to generate chemical reactions using the lens's optics and are cut precisely to match the rhythm of the music.
3. Films are a collaborative medium. Have you ever seen a film's credits at the
end of a show? The list consists of hundreds of names, people associated with acting, directing, choreographing dance or action sequences, and even providing lunch to the cast and crew.
4. Films are an impressive medium. They have been pivotal in igniting and
supporting many social movements. Think Rang De Basanti (2006); you might be able to recall the series of protests and conversations in newsrooms that started across the country.
5. Films are an escapist medium. Sitting in a dark room, cut away from the
world, engulfed in sound, pictures and emotion of a make-believe reality, films have always been an escape for the audience, enchanting them for a longer time, even after the screening.
6. Films are an expensive medium. High-selling actors, shooting on foreign
locations, and including special effects involve large budgets.
15.4.2 Film Industry of India
From the first feature film Raja Harishchandra produced in 1913 to OTT platforms overshadowing the industry today, more than a century later, India's film industry has seen many changes. On average, about 1800 films are produced in India in a year, which is the largest production number in the world. While often mistakenly taken as the Indian film industry, Hindi cinema constitutes a fraction of films produced in India, albeit a major one. Films are also produced in multiple regional languages, such as Tamil and Bengali Bhojpuri. Apart from the films made in far corners of the country, imports from other countries are also released in India, making it a very important market owing to the population. There have been cases where regional actors have acted in mainstream Hindi cinema, or popular actors from India have also made a leap to foreign films. Since the past decade, major international producers, such as Disney and Fox, have entered the market as producers, thus bringing foreign capital as well.

A still from the movie Raja Harishchandra, 1913 (Picture Courtesy: Wikimedia Commons)
15.4.3 Issues of Representation in Films
Being an expensive and escapist medium, cinema largely has stuck to formulaic storytelling, which relies on select tropes to entertain the audience without risking the invested capital. The formula pertains to an accepted mix of codes that the audience has liked. So, if stories about a rich girl meeting a poor boy and falling in love have proven successful at the box office, filmmakers will add further elements to this and keep making films based on this formula. This will ensure that the audience will turn up in the theatres, and thus, the money spent by the producers will be recovered. While seeming profitable to the producers, this method has caused a severe lack of deviation and, thus, experimentation in mainstream cinema. Stories would omit any type of deviance from normative sexuality or gender and stick to a certain caste or religion. Female characters would commonly be represented in a sexualised light through item songs or even the characterisation of the role through costumes, roles in the narrative and picturisation as well. The bias is not limited to only gender but extends to religion as well. Muslim and Christian characters would be identifiable from their costumes, and a transgender or a homosexual character would be the butt of jokes in the story. Can you recall a film where the protagonist was a person from the North Eastern region or even a Tamilian? With the advent of digital filmmaking, film production costs have come down, easing the process and participation in film production. Thus, the amount of experimentation in cinema has increased. You would find characters belonging to all walks of life starting to get meatier roles than just comic sidekicks. Issues about Dalits, religious minorities, and people belonging to any point on the gender spectrum have stories based on them today. The parallel cinema movement has been instrumental in this, and now, OTT platforms also support such narratives.

Television, Films,
Activity - 2
Print Publishing
Use the Internet to research the success of recent major motion pictures. List five films that are box office successes, locally or internationally. If possible, view the online trailers for these five films. Describe who or what is represented as central to the storyline. Explain why this representation might be appealing to audiences. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the different features of films as a medium of mass communication?

2. What are various issues of representation in films?

15.5 PRINT PUBLISHING AS A MEDIUM OF MASS
COMMUNICATION
This book is one of the many you may have read while completing your education. As a communication process, you read the author's words, thus making sure that the message has been shared. The units in this book were written by different writers, edited by the editorial team and published by the university. It is one of many publications that are printed across the country every year. Thus, it can be summarised that print media uses the printed word to communicate with the audience. It encapsulates all the periodicals, flyers, catalogues, etc., published for communicating with the masses by wide circulation. It is one of the oldest media formats, as early men used to inscribe stone tablets, metal sheets, or palm leaves and circulate them for wider reading even before the paper was invented. It was after the invention of the typing press by Johannes Gutenberg in the 15th century that the publication of books began. The same press further evolved into mechanical, electronic and now digital publishing over time, allowing for faster printing and thus leading to printing newspapers, which could be circulated daily.
15.5.1 Features of the Medium
Following are a few features of print media:
1. Print media needs a literate audience. Unlike the audio and visual formats, it
depends on the written word and thus needs the audience to be literate to consume it.
2. Print media works according to a deadline, i.e. it needs to be published
periodically and thus needs to abide by the timelines strictly. One cannot print a midday edition of a morning newspaper if anything urgent arrives, nor can one stall the printing in wait for a late arrival news. 281

Representation in India 3. It can be reread and rechecked. Unlike the dynamic media formats, print does not return to its word after printing. TV broadcasts may keep updating the facts, but print needs to recheck and confirm before printing. Similarly, the audience can reread a sentence at its own pace for better understanding. For the same reason, print media is deemed more credible than any other media format.
4. Print media provides more scope and time for analysis. Depending on the
audience's interest, one may read the editorial on a burning issue after consuming the story on the main page. TV and radio do not allow you to delve deeper into an issue. You may need to wait for another show for that.
5. Print does not have the aid of audio-visuals; it depends solely on the creative
use of language. Not catering to the auditory and visual senses (apart from a few sparse photographs), print relies heavily on the written word to attract the readers' attention. You may recall some headlines relying on wordplay, puns and metaphors, all tools of literary art, to capture the audience's attention.
15.5.2 Publishing Industry of India
The first newspaper was published in India by James Augustus Hickey and named the Bengal Gazette in 1780. Leading the way, within a decade, newspapers in many indigenous languages were being printed across the country. These papers also played a pivotal role in motivating and uniting the public against the British Raj, thus paving the way to the freedom struggle. Hickey's Bengal Gazette dated March 10, 1781 (Courtesy: James Augustus Hicky, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons) About 1000 dailies are being printed in Hindi, while the second most popular language is English, with a circulation of 250 dailies. Dainik Jagran is the most popular daily, with a total readership of over 70 lakh nationwide. While being the most popular medium at the time of independence, the popularity of print is overshadowed today due to the rise of radio, television, and now the Internet as media platforms.
15.5.3 Issues of Representation in Print
Have you ever visited a newspaper office? Publication houses that own and run editorial, printing and circulation of periodicals are huge organisations. A popular newspaper

needs a staff of thousands, spread across the country, to be kept up and running. Thus, Television, Films,
Print Publishing
it would need much capital to keep the organisation thriving. Therefore, the print media has been owned by large conglomerates which have wielded soft power over the masses. Depending on owners' inclination, the media, and thus the coverage, also leans. So, if the owners are influenced by a particular political party, religious ideology, or gender discourse, the effect would be seen in the content. There has been a long-standing debate on the covers of magazines airbrushing and editing the images of the stars to fit into and further reinforce the stereotypical standards of beauty. Moreover, the writing and the headlines would associate women necessarily with their partners or the nearest male relative; for example, you would always read "Mother of two dies in a road accident" compared to "Businessman killed in a car crash". See the difference? It is how the writers define the characters in a news story. Moreover, stories about crimes of passion usually find more takers than other stories. Thus, you could see more space given to them in the papers. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the features of print media?

2. What is the most popular language for print media in India?

15.6 GENDER REPRESENTATION IN ADVERTISING
We briefly discussed three media platforms, along with their features and impact. But one thing that is common to all media formats, including these three, is advertising. Advertising can be defined as a targeted communication for marketing a product or service. It employs one or more media platforms to reach the target audience. Advertisers buy Media space, which generates revenue for the platforms, for example, space in a newspaper or airtime on television. After that, advertisers create messages carefully suiting the features of different platforms and inducing the product's sale. These messages are called advertisements. Advertisements are popular media products crafted and consumed with a specific purpose: sale. Advertisers use various types of narratives to relate to the audience and motivate the audience to become customers. These narratives would be relatable to connect the audience to the product. For example, think of a detergent ad, and you would recall a white sari-clad woman with her hair in a bun. She would invariably be occupied with household chores and tending to her family. This is a use of a stereotype, depicting a woman as a primary caregiver in a family. Compare this with an ad for toothpaste; you could recall a dentist recommending toothpaste to you, mostly male, dressed in clinical lab coats and many times with a stethoscope around their necks!

Representation in India The attire emphasises the authority and credibility of a doctor to make a suggestion related to health, irrespective of the fact that dentists hardly use stethoscopes. These two examples elaborate on how gender is depicted in advertisements, thus exposing the audience to the stereotyped messages and reinforcing them further. Activity - 3 Obtain a collection of audio-visual advertisements from the Internet or television in your country. Try to ensure that these advertisements feature both women and men. Write down your observations on how women are represented in the advertisements vis-avismen. Identify the implications of these representations based on the following question: Are certain representations viewed differently by some members of the group? Why do you think so?
15.7 TECHNICAL STRATEGIES IN
REPRESENTATION
Representation in media formats is created by three carefully crafted strategies: selection, omission and construction. Selection pertains to the selection of stories, perspectives, and characters to narrate the story, whether fictional or non-fictional. Omission is editing out the stereotypes by acquiring a fresh perspective. Lastly, construction is the creation of new codes or experimentation with the old ones. One may think that the media merely reports objectively, but bias is induced as soon as a perspective is taken. For example, think of a news report of a sports tournament; if a reporter chooses to interview only the losing side to gather the facts, the report will have a very subdued and even sad undertone. At the same time, interviewing the winning side would give another lopsided version. In such a case, it is the media person's job to select facts from credible sources, omit the bias and construct the story further. The audience sees everything from the narrator's perspective, and the media holds an extremely powerful position in shaping its perspective. Thus, it becomes imperative for the media to be unbiased in representing all population segments.
15.8 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) Some of the pedagogical approaches that can be applied to this unit are: Learners should identify various versions of the representation of historical events. For example, books published during and about the period, films created in various genres, artworks or pictures, and other visuals such as photos and music videos. Visit a museum or archive (if one exists in this subject area in your region), and based on this, collect material to prepare an essay about your observations. A popular feature film formula focuses on the archetypal myth of the 'heroic journey'. Myths represent implicit belief systems that express a culture's fears, desires and aspirations. In these stories, the hero (usually male)- unaware of his destiny- is called upon to take up an important quest. The hero usually 284 passes through several stages as part of the quest, including his 'birth' or

beginning, becoming aware of his 'calling' or destiny, experiencing romance, Television, Films,
Print Publishing
encountering foes, receiving advice from a wise elder and, finally, returning home. Based on this:
- Develop a list of films that are based on this formula. Account for their
appeal. Describe the hero, explaining to what extent the hero represents the desires and values of the individual in society.
- Describe the camera work as well as the use of sound and music. Assess
how these technical elements reinforce the representations central to the story (i.e., the impression created of a villain or a romantic hero). Explain how the meaning of particular scenes in the film would change if, for example, the soundtrack were different. Visit the websites for mainstream, Indigenous or community media that represent alternatives to blockbusters. Browse the selection of stories being told through these companies or organisations. Compare these stories to those being produced by major film studios. Assess the value of these 'independent' organisations in giving representation or voice to alternative Indigenous stories. Discuss the accountability of the film and television industries to their viewers and their relationship to human progress. Why should all viewers be able to see themselves and their stories on the screen? Discuss the implications of mainstream stories and representations for various audiences. Explore how speciality channels, various Internet sites, blogs and new technologies influence storytelling and offer alternative representations to audiences.
15.9 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we touched upon three different platforms of mass media: TV, film, and print publishing. We then discussed their features one by one as ways of mass communication and explored the status of their industrial setups in India. After this, we observed their social impact in the form of representations and inclusion of gender, religion, sexuality, etc., in the narratives of these media. We also covered the representation of gender in the advertising industry as well, mulling over its importance through other media formats. Lastly, we covered a few of the technical strategies adopted by producers for creating content for representation.
15.10 KEYWORDS
Aspect Ratio : Ratio between width and height of the screen. For standard definition, it is 4:3, while for HD, it is 16:9. Primary audience : Category of audience specifically targeted by the program producers. Secondary audience : Category of audience covered indirectly by the programmers, such as mothers watching kids' channels along with the kids. B-roll : Additional footage shot to support the narrative Close-up : A shot which provides visual details of an object Editing : Putting together a combination of shots to create a sequence 285

Representation in India Cinematography : Art of shooting moving images on film Sound design : To create the audio track layered with music, dialogues and sound effects Advertisement : Content created to increase sales of goods or services. Occupies space in media and generates revenue. Headline : An explanatory title in a newspaper explaining the gist of the story
15.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bordwell, D., Thompson, K., & Smith, J. (2017). Film Art: Creativity,
Technology, And Business. Film Art: An Introduction.
2. Kipphan, H. (Ed.). (2001). Handbook of print media: technologies and
production methods. Springer Science & Business Media.
3. Monaco, J. (2009). How to read a film: Movies, media, and beyond. Oxford
University Press.
4. Murray, S. (2020). Introduction to Contemporary Print Culture: Books
as Media. Routledge.
5. Zettl, H. (2014). Television Production Handbook, 12th. Cengage Learning.
6. Zettl, H. (2016). Sight, sound, motion: Applied media aesthetics. Cengage
Learning.
15.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Features of Television as a medium of mass communication:
a. It is an audio-visual medium. b. It is a domestic medium. c. It is a live medium. d. It is a dynamic medium. e. It is an expensive medium.
2. Misrepresentation and underrepresentation of characters on TV are two
primary concerns. Misrepresentation is when a community is wrongly portrayed, and underrepresentation is a lack of characters from a particular community. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The following are a few features of the film as a medium of mass communication:
a) Films are a mass medium.

b) Films are a mechanical art form. Television, Films,
Print Publishing
c) Films are a collaborative medium. d) Films are an impressive medium. e) Films are an escapist medium. f) Films are an expensive medium.
2. Minorities based on gender, religion, region, etc., are underrepresented in
cinema. Films, being formulaic, stick to a tried and tested storyline, with minor deviations, thus side-lining the minorities. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The features of print media are as follows:
a) Print media needs a literate audience. b) Print media works according to a deadline. c) Print media is deemed more credible than any other media format. d) Print media provides more scope for in-depth analysis. e) Print media does not have the aid of audio-visuals; it depends on the creative use of language to capture the audience's attention.
2. about 1000 dailies are being printed in Hindi, while the second most popular
is English, with a circulation of 250 dailies. Dainik Jagran is the most popular daily, with a total readership of over 70 lakh.

UNIT 16 REPRESENTATION AND MUSIC
VIDEOS
Structure
16.0 Introduction
16.1 Learning Outcomes
16.2 Music and Indian Society
16.3 Reach and Popularity of Music Videos
16.4 Elements of a Music Video
16.4.1 Audio Elements
16.4.2 Visual Elements
16.4.3 Content
16.5 Representation of Various Segments
16.5.1 Gender
16.5.2 Race
16.5.3 Sexuality
16.6 Impact of Music Videos
16.6.1 On Producers
16.6.2 On Consumers
16.7 Alternative Music Industry
16.8 Analysing Music Videos
16.9 Pedagogical Approaches
16.10 Let Us Sum Up
16.11 Further Readings
16.12 Keywords
16.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
16.0 INTRODUCTION
In this unit, you will be introduced to the world of music videos, their reach and their impact on society. To begin with, you will learn about how music videos are produced and consumed. We will explore various music video elements and analyse how they impact the final product. Then, we will discuss the content of these videos and examine their representation of different segments of society. We will then analyse the impact of these videos on consumers and producers. Lastly, you will be introduced to analysing music videos by yourself and discover an alternate music industry.
16.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you will be able to: discuss the expanse of the Indian music video industry; identify various elements of music video production;

ascertain the representation of different social segments in music videos; Representation and
Music Videos
distinguish between the mainstream and alternative music industry; and analyse music videos.
16.2 MUSIC AND INDIAN SOCIETY
Music has been an integral part of Indian culture. With classical Indian music devoting ragas to different times of the day and seasons, to musical narratives in folk tales, music is not only the thread and glue between the vast heterogeneous cultures in India, but it is also a meter for the cultural and language and religious diversity in the subcontinent. Music has been an inseparable part of life, from lullabies to newborn babies, songs sung during crop harvesting, and mourning songs accompanying funeral rites. Bhakti and Sufi movements utilised music to spread religion, and nritya nations were a popular form of entertainment before the advent of mass media. The films from the Indian subcontinent are uniformly classified under the musical genre due to the inseparable song and dance routine. The music industry in India started in the early twentieth century with the production and sales of music records played on gramophones. You may recall seeing one in a period film. Gradually, the records were replaced by magnetic audio cassettes, which could be played on a tape recorder, and then compact discs (CDs), which needed a CD player to run. Today, the Internet has become the most popular medium for listening to music. With the rising popularity of song streaming services, the industry's value is estimated to be 23 billion INR by the end of 2023. The industry thrives 70 per cent on film music, 30 per cent on the Indi-pop genre, and a minuscule percentage on other formats. Music videos are short videos, around 5 minutes long, featuring the picturisation of a song track. You may think of them as advertisements for the film or the artist, and like any other advertising method, they aim to increase film sales or the music album. On the Internet, music videos ensure hits and views on the songs.
16.3 REACH AND POPULARITY OF MUSIC VIDEOS
As Indian cinema thrives on music, it has been a practice in the film industry for the songs to be picturised elaborately and lavishly, packed with eye-catching choreography, opulent sets or picturesque locations and beautiful costumes. These videos may or may not have relevance to the story and plot. The origin of music videos can be traced to Awara(1951), which had a nine-minute-long song shot as a dream sequence. As discussed earlier, music videos are also seen as an excellent vehicle for film publicity. They efficiently give a brief peek into the film's lead pair's chemistry, are packed with catchy lyrics set to hummable tunes and are choreographed with imitable signature steps. If you ask your parents, they would fondly remember the days of Chitrahaar, a program on the National Television Channel Doordarshan in the 80s that played videos of popular songs from films. Globalisation in the '90s saw the rise of channels explicitly dedicated to music and played music videos all day long, such as MTV and Channel
V. These channels had programming catering to various genres of music videos and

Representation in India were not only seen as platforms for film publicity but was also instrumental in promoting the Indi pop music, which otherwise had very few platforms for reaching to the target audience. Singers like Alisha Chenoy, Biddu, Daler Mehndi, etc., gained popularity due to these channels during this era. Coming to the public eye with their music videos, these artists made their way to the popular film industry in no time. Stills from the dream sequence of the movie Awaara (Courtesy: Shemaroo Youtube) Today, these music videos comprise a major portion of the media production industry. Budget allocations and, thus, production standards are high, and the videos are shot especially at foreign locations. At times, local artists and talents are also hired to give an exotic look to the video, and costumes, make-up, and hair also set trends across the country. Activity - 1 You must have seen short reels on social media of people, including celebrities, dancing to the tunes of a popular song. What do you think is the purpose of this? Why are people shooting and uploading these videos? What does this signify? Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is a music video?

2. How do you think globalisation affected the music industry in India? Representation and
Music Videos

16.4 ELEMENTS OF A MUSIC VIDEO
While enjoying a music video, one does not consider the elements used in its making. But the basic elements and their composition create an impactful music video. Music videos are also produced like any other audio-visual media production. While the audio track is the primary product, the video becomes inseparable as it makes them more engaging, entertaining, relatable and shareable across many social media platforms driven by visuals. Not only are these videos broadcast on television and shared on social media, but they also inspire a lot of dance routines. The following are the elements of a music video:
16.4.1 Audio Elements
The first and most important component is the audio track. The audio track comprises a lyrical song complimented by a combination of musical instruments. The songwriter first writes the song and then sings by a couple of singers, mostly a solo or a duet backed with a choir if needed. At times, the writer and singer are the same. Then, the music producer records the singing and the orchestra's instruments, simultaneously or separately, to be mixed during post-production. Post-production of the track includes sweetening the audio, where the human voice is treated with various filters to sound better. Think of it as using photo editing software on photographs. After treating all sounds separately, they are mixed to form one track. Today, much music is also produced electronically or digitally and mixed along. Lastly, copies of the soundtrack are made and shared with the producers to create a supplementing video.
16.4.2 Visual Elements
The video production team listens to the song and decides on a storyline and treatment for the video. Sometimes, the song narrates a story, making it easier to picture it for the shoot. For example, a song about a sportsperson's struggle, time spent in practice, and gradual road to victory can be easily shot. Sometimes, the song is theme-based, but the video contains a storyline. For example, a romantic song can be pictured with a simple love story. Lastly, the song could be thematic, and the video could be a dance routine or a montage that does not necessarily narrate a story. The video producers start looking for locations, actors and crew for the shoot. A video might be shot at a distant foreign location or in front of a green screen within an indoor studio. The green screen is replaced with graphics or required scenery in post- production. The indoor studio would facilitate ease of handling equipment and lighting, while location shoot poses challenges as one may need to lug the equipment to the top of the mountain or at a beach. When the storyline and cast are finalised, a choreographer is hired to teach the actors or dancers the dance steps. If the song is of the hip-hop genre, one would need to hire a hip-hop-trained dancer as a choreographer, and if the song is a Rajasthani folk song, 291

Representation in India one would need a dancer trained as a folk dance artist. The choreographer and director plan and rehearse the entire video before going to the location to save the rehearsing time. On the other hand, make-up artists, costume designers, art directors, etc., are also planned simultaneously. After all this planning, the team shoots at the location. Post-production of a video involves editing the shot footage set to the audio track. While editing a music video, the editors need to keep the beats or flow of the music in mind to achieve a rhythm in the video edit. The edit could be fast and energetic or slow, depending on the mood of the music. Special effects and graphics are added to the video if necessary for the narrative.
16.4.3 Content
Music videos are generally of three types:
1. Performance-based: These types of music videos have the artist performing
the song, and this includes singing, playing an instrument and, at times, dancing as well. The band or background dancers could support them. These videos are usually used to showcase the artists' skills.
2. Narrative-based: These music videos are based on a story performed by
actors or, sometimes, with the artist. These are usually short stories based on the theme of romance. To add a bit of variety, these videos could be shot in exotic locations or with many close-ups.
3. Abstract: These videos are based on an idea and use abstract imagery and
symbolism to show the concept. Philosophical in nature, these videos depend on the audience for interpretation. Have you ever wondered why most of the popular songs and videos are focused on themes of romance? While the target audience for any segment of the entertainment sector is vast, spanning a vast population, the youth has the buying capacity to spend on film tickets or music albums and time to devote to leisurely entertainment. Keeping this target audience in mind, the songwriters usually write songs about issues and themes popular with the youth. This is why romance is the most popular, ranging from love at first sight to heartbreak. Other popular genres are life struggle/ inspirational songs, patriotic songs, and songs based on other relationships, such as friendship, sibling love, etc.
16.5 REPRESENTATION OF VARIOUS SEGMENTS
We have discussed the content of the music videos and their broad categories. Like any other media text, music videos are also a way of representing various segments of society. Representation is basically how these segments are portrayed on screen vis- a-vis their counterparts. Let us see how music videos in India represent gender, race and sexuality.
16.5.1 Gender
Picture this: a peppy song about the beauty of a woman, how the boy/man is mesmerised seeing her for the first time and falls in love with her. Towards the end, they dance their way into the sunset. Sounds familiar? Do you see the stereotypical roles associated

with gender? How is a man supposed to woo, and a woman is supposed to be so Representation and
Music Videos
beautiful that she needs to be wooed? Music videos pick this formula and rehash it with many permutations and combinations by adding more narrative elements. Examples of hypersexualisation and de-individualisation (Source: YRF Youtube) The videos usually hypersexualise, de-individualise and show women as the subordinates of men. You would wonder, but you would easily recall seeing a male singer crooning away in an exotic location and female dancers prancing around skimpily clothed. There would be more women than men, all synchronised to the lyrics and beats. The female background dancers don't have individual identities, nor is their presence in any way important for the narrative in the video. Thus, women appear as a mass, and men appear as individuals. Also, the men would lead the dance or the narrative, and women would be the aides to the plot. They are usually shown as passive participants. Of course, exceptions exist, but they would touch upon these themes, even if distantly. All actors would be shown in a sexualised light with skimpy clothing, erotic dance steps and lascivious expressions. Moreover, the camera would also shoot their bodies in close-up shots, emphasising certain body parts to entice the audience further. While this applies to men, it is more commonly the women who have to bear the brunt of catering to the male gaze (Mulvey, 1989). This makes the actors on the screen appear highly sexualised. At times, music videos from films are also known as Item songs. The term 'item' is associated with a beautiful woman in Mumbai slang, thus underlining the objectification of women. These songs rarely directly relate to the film's story or plot. Several researchers doing a content analysis of music videos from the West or regional Indian music industries throw further light on this matter.
16.5.2 Race
The issue of race in India is not upfront like in the West. There is no clear distinction between the population, like the Black and the White communities. But our colonial past affects our perception of race to a great extent. Being ruled by the British for over two centuries has instilled in our society an awe of white skin or fairness. So much so that fairness creams found a huge market in the South Asian subcontinent.

Representation in India Society accepts the Western standards of beauty, that is, light skin, brown eyes, and straight brown hair, and these standards find reinforcement in the popular media. Try to picture a male or female actor from your favourite music videos. You would recall them as having an almost Caucasian complexion, regardless of the language the video is in. But moving ahead, the representation of communities is a huge issue in films, music videos and other popular media platforms. The year was 2007, and one of the most prominent actresses of her heyday, Madhuri Dikshit, was returning with the film 'Aaja Nachle' after a hiatus of several years. Film publicity began with a music video for a song with the same name, as Dikshit is a renowned dancer. The lyrics mentioned the word 'teli' (Hindu caste which makes/sells oil) in a line. A considerable uproar followed as protests erupted nationwide against using this word. A particular community that felt the song was portraying them poorly objected to the film's release altogether. The song had to be rerecorded by editing out that specific word and was rereleased following the furore. This is one of the many examples where a community in India has been hurt or offended by their representation in the lyrics/video of a song. Several songs must be re-edited and reshot to appease the hurt communities.
16.5.3 Sexuality
Following the Supreme Court's landmark judgement of decriminalising homosexuality in 2018, much popular media started seeing depictions of the third gender. The OTT industry has further created niches of audiences that can access specific content, and the inclusion of homosexual characters in narratives on the web has increased quite a manifold over the years. But music videos have yet to witness this revolution. About 100 per cent of videos have narratives focused on heterosexual romance. Yet, surprisingly, in the background dancers, one may see women touching each other provocatively, signifying a nod to lesbian relationships. Still, the opposite, that is, gay or male-to-male inclination, is rarely ever seen in the video. This could be because most producers are male and create content to cater to the male gaze. Popular content, especially music videos, has a long way to go to attain a fair representation of people from all sexualities on screen. Activity - 2 Pick up a popular music video in your native language. Watch it and check if the points mentioned above regarding the depiction of gender, race, and sexuality hold in its case.
16.6 IMPACT OF MUSIC VIDEOS
16.6.1 On Producers
As discussed earlier, music videos also act as a vehicle for publicity. When a part of a film, these videos help publicise the film, and when shot for a pop artist, these videos become a method of carrying the audio track to the television screens and thus to a larger audience. A video has a far greater capacity to hook the audience than an audio track as it interacts with the sense of sight and hearing. The producers spend a lot of money shooting these songs, which are often credited with the film's success.

The popularity of these music videos has always led to a steep rise in ticket sales or Representation and
Music Videos
album sales for the songs, translating today to YouTube hits. Such has been the success of these music videos. T Series, a company that used to be in the music production business and later into music video production, is the YouTube channel with the most significant number of subscribers worldwide. Several singers who could not find opportunities to sing in films started their careers with independent music albums, e.g., Sonu Nigam, Sona Mohapatra, Kailash Kher, etc. Moving ahead of the singers, many dancers have made their careers by dancing in these music videos, starting from Helen to Nora Fatehi. These music videos help make money by attracting viewers to films or YouTube channels and brand placements. Brands associated with luxury items are seen endorsed by celebrities in these music videos, and thus, they also manage to reach their target audience base. The companies very selectively associate with artists who make music related to the mood/theme of the brand. Many tourist resorts allow shooting these music videos on their premises to attract more tourists yearly.
16.6.2 On Consumers
When one media product can be used to advertise so many other products, it won't be far-reaching to say that its impact would also be multipronged. To begin with, it is a common sight to see family members and friends dancing away to popular music tracks during weddings and other social events. A few years ago, parents used to enrol their kids in dance classes to learn dance steps so that they could perform on stage, in social gatherings, and, if lucky, on a TV talent show. Today, several YouTube channels host video tutorials of dance or teach Zumba, thus institutionalising the acceptance and popularity of these music videos. Parents videotape their kids, upload them on social media platforms, and share them in family groups. Thus it would not be a long shot to say that the audience interacts with these music videos much beyond just watching them or humming later. But how this affects the audience subliminally has been a matter of research in the past decade. Studies suggest that music plays a vital role in identity formation in young people. Adolescents choose their music based on age, culture, peer exposure and mental status. Many people have reported listening to music to elevate their mood and create an ambience. These facts highlight the importance of music and music videos on the psychology of individuals. We have now discussed the music videos' content in earlier segments. What do you think happens when youth are exposed to such content? Research on the impact of music videos establishes that the youth is more likely to pick up habits of smoking, drinking and indulging in substance abuse if they are exposed to music videos showing the same. You would easily recall songs and videos about alcohol, partying and getting 'high'. More often than not, these songs and videos advocate indulging in 'risky' behaviour to appear cool. Moving further, young people are also likely to view gender in the manner showcased in the video. This implies that men view women in a sexualised, subordinate light, while women have reported lesser self-esteem in the case of higher exposure to music videos. Self-esteem is directly related to them comparing their bodies with the ones shown in these videos. These videos build up a lot of expectations in teenagers about their romantic lives and personas. When these expectations are not met, it results in low self-confidence and, at times, other related mental health issues.

Representation in India Lastly, with due research, these videos have also been held responsible for sexualising children from a very young age due to their reach through TV channels, the Internet on Smartphones and last but not least, endorsement by elders in family gatherings. Most research has been conducted in Western countries with few Indian counterparts, but the effects have resounded everywhere. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Name the audio-visual elements of a music video.

2. How is the female gender represented in the music videos?

16.7 ALTERNATIVE MUSIC INDUSTRY
While film music has always comprised the famous school of music in India, Independent music artists have always coexisted on the fringes of the mainstream music industry. Artists who could not get enough funding to produce the music they like, or those who did not cater to the mass audience, lie in this segment. Many genres of music, ranging from Ghazal classical to devotional music, belong to this alternative music industry. With time, technology has simplified music recording and made the process less expensive, helping the Alternative music industry. The decade of the 90s brought many indie pop bands to the limelight. A few Gazhal artists, such as Jagjit Singh and Pankaj Udhas, have also made their way to the parallel film movement. In contrast, Indie pop singers such as Mohit Chauhan and Hariharan also made a name for themselves in mainstream cinema. Artists from the alternative music industry (Courtesy: IMDb, Rakeshkonni, CC BY-SA 3.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0>, via Wikimedia Commons) Technologies like Bluetooth file sharing, seen as a threat to piracy by the mainstream industry, became responsible for spreading the popularity of alternate music. Many

singers who lacked methods to reach a mass audience became popular with the help Representation and
Music Videos
of discreet file sharing. Today, song streaming services and low-budget OTT or YouTube productions have become excellent launch vehicles for independent music artists. With internet penetration rising by the day, indie artists like Prateek Kuhad and Shirley Setia are also becoming household names and breaking the hegemony of the popular music industry.
16.8 ANALYSING MUSIC VIDEOS
Having discussed the wide usage of music videos by music producers and the heavy impact on consumers, viewing them wisely becomes a matter of great concern. Like any other media content, music videos must be analysed before consumption. When the impact is profound, it implies the importance of the content. To analyse a music video, start by watching the video track and listening to the audio track separately. Here are a few questions that you might want to raise by yourself while analysing the music videos:
- Are the song and video based on the same theme? When you first heard the
song, how did you picture its video would be?
- What is the narrative of the video? Can you describe it in one line?
- Is the narrative biased or uses any stereotypes?
- Does the narrative occur in the real world or a make-believe fantasy world?
Why did the director choose this setting?
- Look at the way people are dressed, the actors and the singer. Do they dress
up similarly in real life?
- Observe their actions. Would they be doing these things in actuality?
- If their dress and behaviour are not life-like, why or to what benefit has it
been portrayed?
- How has it been shot? Do you see a lot of close-ups? If yes, of what?
- What emotions does the music video induce in you? Would you want to see
the video again?
- Who do you think the video is targeted at? How are they catering to that
particular audience group? Activity - 3 Think of your favourite music video. Analyse it with the help of factors and processes shared in this segment. Discuss the results with your family and friends. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the alternative music industry?

2. What is the need for analysing music videos?

16.9 PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES
(Instructions for the course counsellers) This unit has emphasised music videos from the vantage point of the elements as well as the impact of the elements on users and producers. The pedagogical interventions for learners can be determined on three levels- production, representation and interpretation. Some approaches are:
1. Production and Representation
Examine the content of the lyrics, including a description of how the images in the video relate to the lyrics and melody of the song and the teacher's interpretation of the lyrics. Examine the technical components of the video, considering the use of colour, lighting, editing (pace, juxtaposition, cutting on the beat), special effects, and the connection between audio and video components. Examine the social issues dealt with in the video, with consideration given to how those messages might change if people of a different social class or race were included or if the male and female characters switched roles.
2. Interpretation: Interpret the ideological and value messages being presented in a
video using the following questions as a guide: Does the video present the beliefs of one particular group? Describe the representations of men and women in the video. Are any stereotypes used? If so, to what effect? Who is in a position of power? Who is not? Who benefits as a result? Does the video exclude any groups of people or their beliefs? What definitions of happiness, success, or morality are applied?
16.10 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, you were introduced to music videos in a new light. You were taken through various elements comprising these videos, their uses and their impacts on consumers and producers. We also discussed the representation and inclusion of multiple sectors of society in these music videos and explored their repercussions on consumers and producers. We also learned to analyse these music videos for better consumption and understanding. Finally, we explored India's music industry, including alternative music.

Representation and
16.11 KEYWORDS
Music Videos
Nritya Natika : Traditional theatre format with music and dance Chitrahar : A weekly program on Doordarshan in the 1980s-90s, which played videos of songs from popular films. Hypersexualised : A person whose mannerisms, costume, and picturisation are all in a very sexual light. Bluetooth : A technology that allows for the short-range wireless exchange of files Sufi and Bhakti : Religious movements in Islam and Hinduism that preached Movements through music.
16.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Manuel, P. (2012). Popular music is a popular expression in North India and
the Bhojpuri region, from cassette to VCD culture. South Asian Popular Culture, 10(3), 223-236.2. Mulvey, L. (1989). Visual pleasure and narrative cinema. In Visual and Other
Pleasures (pp. 14-26). Palgrave Macmillan, London.
3. Osborn, B. (2021). The Bloomsbury Handbook of Popular Music Video
Analysis. Edited by Lori A. Burns and Stan Hawkins. New York: Bloomsbury,
2019.464 pp. ISBN 9781501342332. Popular Music, 40(1), 167-172.4. Osborn, B. (2021). Interpreting Music Video: Popular Music in the Post-
MTV Era. Routledge.
5. Srivastav, S. 2021. Self-Acceptance and Hip-Hop Music: An Exploration
among Female Students at Delhi University. In: M. B. Marron, ed., Misogyny across Global Media, 1st ed. London: Rowman and Littlefield.
ISBN: 978-1-7936-0621-1
16.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Music videos are audio-visual productions based on a song. They usually
have a song and dance routine.
2. Globalisation in the '90s saw the rise of channels explicitly dedicated to music
videos, such as MTV and Channel V, which had programming catering to various genres of music videos. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Lyrics, human voices, and music tracks (accompaniment of various instruments)
are audio elements of a music video.

Representation in India 2. The videos usually hypersexualise, de-individualise and make women the subordinates of men. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The alternative music industry consists of independent artists who still need to
produce music that would become popular with many people.
2. Given the impact of music videos on people's psychology and personal
development, one should analyse music videos like any other media message.


======================================================================
=== SOURCE: MNM-036E.pdf ===
======================================================================

MNM-036
Digital Media Literacy
Indira Gandhi National Open University
School of Journalism and New Media Studies
BLOCK 1
MOBILE TRANSITION 7
BLOCK 2
INTERNET OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES 87
BLOCK 3
DIGITAL INFORMATION LITERACY 153
BLOCK 4
PARTICIPATION IN INTERACTIVE MEDIA 235

EXPERTS COMMITTEE
Prof. K.S. Arul Selvan Prof. Pradeep Nair Prof. Bidisha Chaudhuri
Director, SOJNMS - Department of Communication, IIIT Bangalore
Chairperson Central University of HP,
Dharamshala Prof. B. P. Sanjay Prof. Vigneshwara Illavarasan Prof. Subodh Kesharwani Former Vice-Chancellor, IIT Delhi, New Delhi Director, Center for Online
CUTN, Thiruvarur Education, IGNOU
Prof. Subhash Dhulia Prof. P. V. Suresh Dr. Krishna Shankar Kusuma Former Professor, SOJNMS, Director, School of Computer Associate Professor of
IGNOU, New Delhi [and and Information Sciences, Communication, JMI,
Former Vice-Chancellor IGNOU New Delhi
Uttarakhand Open University
Prof. Subodh Kesharwani Ms. Mahalakshmi Jayaram Mr. Amit Gupta
Director, Center for Online Deputy Senior Editor, Senior Assistant Editor, Aaj
Education, IGNOU The Hindu, Chennai Tak Digital, New Delhi
Mr. Alok Verma Prof. Shambhu Nath Singh Prof. O. P. Dewal
Independent Journalist, Former Director, SOJNMS, Professor, SOJNMS,
New Delhi IGNOU IGNOU
Dr. Ramesh Yadav Dr. Shikha Rai Dr. Amit Kumar
Associate Professor, Associate Professor Assistant Professor,
SOJNMS, IGNOU SOJNMS, IGNOU SOJNMS, IGNOU
Dr. Padmini Jain Dr. Usha Chander
Assistant Professor, Research Officer,
SOJNMS, IGNOU SOJNMS, IGNOU
PROGRAMME COORDINATOR: Prof. K.S. Arul Selvan
BLOCK 1
Unit 1 Neelima Mathur Unit 2 Prof. K S Arul Selvan
Independent Journalist and Executive SOJNMS
Director, Formedia, New Delhi Garima Mishra, SOJNMS
Unit 3 Dr. Vijay Soni Unit 4 Prof. K S Arul Selvan
& 6 Deputy Editor, OPEN Magazine, & 13 SOJNMS
New Delhi Aakriti Taneja, SOJNMS
Unit 5 Prof. K S Kusuma Unit 7 Adopted from MAJMC of SOJNMS
MCRC, Jamia Millia Islamia & 16
New Delhi
Unit 8 Dr. Rachna Sharma Unit 9 Adopted from EPGPathshala,
Associate Professor, IIMC MOE, Govt of India
New Delhi
Unit 10, Dr. Manorama Tripathi, Unit Prof. K S Arul Selvan
11 & 12 Librarian, JNU, New Delhi 14 SOJNMS, Madhumita Das, SOJNMS
Unit 15 Dr. Sonali Srivastav
Assistant Professor, NIFT,
Panchkula, Haryana
PRODUCTION TEAM
Mr. Sanjay Agarwal
Asst. Registrar
MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi
July, 2024 (c) Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2024
ISBN:
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, without permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. Further information on the Indira Gandhi National Open University courses may be obtained from the University's office at Maidan Garhi, New Delhi. Printed and published on behalf of the Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi by the Registrar, MPDD, IGNOU, New Delhi. Laser Typeset by Tessa Media & Computers, C-206, A.F.E.-II, Okhla, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
BLOCK 1 MOBILE TRANSITION 7
UNIT 1 Reading Media and Information Texts 11
UNIT 2 The Medium and the Message 27
UNIT 3 From Traditional Media to Digital Media 49
UNIT 4 Uses of New Media Technologies in Society 66
BLOCK 2 INTERNET OPPORTUNITIES AND
CHALLENGES 87
UNIT 5 Uses of Interactive Multimedia Tools 91
UNIT 6 Young People in the Virtual World 106
UNIT 7 Challenges and Risks in the Virtual World 121
UNIT 8 Promotion of Alternative Media 136
BLOCK 3 DIGITAL INFORMATION LITERACY 153
UNIT 9 Information Literacy 157
UNIT 10 Applications of Information Literacy 183
UNIT 11 Learning Environments & Information Literacy 199
UNIT 12 Digital Information Processing 215
BLOCK 3 PARTICIPATION IN INTERACTIVE
MEDIA 235
UNIT 13 Participation in Media Systems 239
UNIT 14 Political Participation and Digital Media 256
UNIT 15 Film Genres and Storytelling 270
UNIT 16 Advertising Literacy 283

COURSE INTRODUCTION
MNM036 Digital Media Literacy (DML) is an extension of our earlier course, MNM35 Media and Information Literacy (MIL). In MIL, we discussed media and information systems' exploring, engaging, and empowering dimensions, which help us understand how to access media, critically analyse media contents, and responsibly participate in society-wide communication. As an extension of the MIL course, this course will examine the application side of media literacy, especially in the context of digital communication platforms. There are four Blocks and 16 Units in this course, through which you will understand the dynamic interactive platform. Block 1: Media Transition. Throughout this Block, we will learn about the ever-evolving landscape of media in the digital age. In Unit 1, "Reading Media and Information Texts," we will understand the complexities of media literacy. From dissecting traditional advertising on television to navigating social media, we equip ourselves with the critical tools needed to discern truth from misinformation. Unit 2, The Medium and the Message, further explores the symbiotic relationship between media forms and their messages, focusing on news dissemination. By understanding the nuances of different media platforms, we enhance our ability to consume and analyse news content effectively, fostering news literacy. Unit 3, "From Traditional Media to Digital Media Technologies," we trace the transformative journey of media technologies, exploring their societal impacts and the emergence of digital inequalities. In Unit 4, "Uses of New Media Technologies for Society," we explore the transformative influence of digital media on society, empowering learners to critically engage with and harness the potential of new media technologies for societal empowerment and engagement. Block 2: Internet Opportunities and Challenges. In this module, we embark on a journey through the dynamic landscape of digital learning, exploring its vast array of possibilities and complexities. Unit 5 delves into "Uses of Interactive Multimedia Tools," where we unravel the intricacies of interactive learning formats, from text to digital games, and their role in education. We'll dissect the significance of free and open-source software in content creation and distinguish between educational and entertainment games. Moving forward to Unit 6, "Young People in the Virtual World," we traverse the historical evolution of communication technologies and their impact on generational learning. By examining the virtual world's influence on digital natives and participatory culture, we uncover its advantages and risks. Unit 7, "The Concept of Security in Cyberspace," urges us to understand the virtual realm's complexities before delving into cyber security. We'll explore the landscape of evolving threats and the necessity for robust defences and legal frameworks. Finally, in Unit 8, "Promotion of Alternative Media through Digital Media," we shine a light on the transformative power of digital technology in media communication. By critically assessing ownership, content creation, and audience engagement, we'll gain a deeper understanding of alternative media's essence and its challenges in promoting inclusivity and participatory democracy. Join us as we navigate the opportunities and challenges of the digital age.

Block 3: Digital Information Literacy. This module delves into the multifaceted world of information literacy, a crucial skill set in today's digital age. Unit 9 starts our exploration by delving into the core concepts, theories, and models underpinning Information Literacy (IL). We will examine various definitions and models, including the SCONUL 7 Pillars of IL, UNESCO IL
Standard, and Swiss Standards for Information Literacy. Understanding these
frameworks will equip you with the foundation to navigate the information landscape confidently and critically. Moving on to Unit 10, we focus on the practical applications of information literacy. In a world inundated with information, mastering the skills to locate, evaluate, and utilise information effectively is essential. By understanding the significance of information literacy, you empower yourself to make informed choices and contribute meaningfully to discussions. Unit 11 welcomes you to the transformative realm of online learning, emphasising the crucial role of information literacy in virtual environments. As we navigate this digital landscape, we will explore self-regulated learning and the evolving role of libraries in providing access to knowledge. Finally, in Unit 12, we delve into digital information processing, unravelling its structure, processing mechanisms, and ethical considerations. By the end of this module, you will not only grasp the fundamentals of digital information but also cultivate the necessary skills to navigate the digital landscape with prudence and proficiency. Block 4 of our course, where we explore the dynamic landscape of Participation in Interactive Media. In Unit 13, we will dissect the fusion of media and information systems within the modern 'Information society.' From the traditional mediums to the expansive realms of social media and the Internet, we will explore how these platforms shape our understanding of the world and facilitate the exchange of ideas. We will investigate the evolving role of audiences as active participants, transitioning from passive consumers to prosumers, and the emergence of participatory cultures. Unit 14 will take us into Political Participation and Digital Media. Here, we will understand the diverse avenues through which citizens engage in political discourse, both online and offline. By examining digital media tools, we will uncover how platforms like social media empower individuals to shape political agendas and mobilise communities. Moving forward to Unit 15, we will learn about the captivating world of cinema in Film Genres and Storytelling. We will unravel the intricacies of film production, dissect various genres and their stereotypes and understand the art of scriptwriting and storyboarding. In Unit 16, we will explore Advertising Literacy, dissecting advertising techniques, appeals, and the communication process. By integrating previous coursework insights, you will navigate the advertising landscape adeptly, fostering a deeper appreciation for its societal impact. Throughout this Block, we will emphasise critical analysis skills, ethical responsibilities, and the importance of media and information literacy in navigating the ever-evolving landscape of interactive media participation. As digital media is being integrated into our lives extensively, we hope that this course will give us a better understanding of how to handle digital media more meaningfully.

Block
MEDIA TRANSITION
UNIT 1
Reading Media and Information Texts
UNIT 2
The Medium and the Message
UNIT 3
From Traditional Media to Digital Media
UNIT 4
Uses of New Media Technologies in Society

BLOCK 1 INTRODUCTION
As you may be aware, all media contents are manufactured. The contents of journalism, short films, or commercial full-length movies are manufactured by media institutions. Trained media professionals are involved in it. These professionals come from our social environments, and through media content manufacturing, they reflect the existing social norms, values and beliefs. There are a lot of issues that exist in any social setting because there is an imbalance in any social setting regarding class, race, and ethnicity. The dominant groups or institutions always enjoy more power, and in turn, the same groups or institutions get a lot of benefits. This imbalance is reflected in the media content directly or indirectly. Besides that, media institutions are mostly commercial and always aim for profit. As a result, they are always close to power centres and rely on corporate sponsors through advertisements. Closeness to power and dependence on corporations influence the media's functions heavily. Many agendas are imbibed into media content, mostly latently. As a common media user, you should be able to read between the lines to understand the varying underlying meanings and hidden agenda behind any communication. This Block particularly explains the nuances of critically understanding the media's contents.
Unit 1: Reading Media and Information Texts. In this Unit, we explore the
significance of media literacy in today's digital era. From traditional to social media, we analyse each platform's unique characteristics and evolving trends. Topics include the impact of advertising on television, the rise of social media, and the challenges posed by fake news and paid news. We emphasise the importance of critical thinking and fact-checking skills to discern authentic content from misinformation. Through this Unit, you will develop the ability to consume and share information responsibly, contributing to a more informed and media-literate society.
Unit 2: The Medium and the Message: This Unit explores the dynamic
relationship between media forms and the messages they convey, focusing on the news genre. Building upon our previous Unit's exploration of message encoding, we now understand the unique characteristics of different media used for news dissemination. Understanding these media's strengths and limitations is pivotal, as they shape message construction and reception. By dissecting the fundamental codes and conventions employed in print, broadcast, and online news, you'll enhance your ability to produce and analyse news content effectively. This skill is essential for fostering news literacy and critically evaluating news presentations across various platforms.
Unit 3: From Traditional Media to Digital Media: In this Unit, we explore
the transformative journey of media technologies, from ancient cave paintings to the digital revolution. We dissect the roles of traditional media, such as the printing press, and analyse the emergence of digital platforms, including social media and mobile telephony. We examine the societal impacts of these technological shifts, from the empowerment of the middle

class to the complexities of digital inequalities. You will understand the symbiotic relationship between traditional and digital media, acknowledging their shared features and unique characteristics.
Unit 4: Uses Of New Media Technologies For Society: In this Unit, we
explore the transformative influence of digital media on society, exploring how new media technologies have revolutionised communication dynamics. From the convergence of traditional and digital media to the emergence of participatory culture, we examine the profound shifts in media production, consumption, and societal practices. Through discussions on digital activism, e-governance, and participatory politics, we unravel the socio-cultural and democratic implications of these technological advancements. By fostering an understanding of new media literacy, this Unit empowers learners to critically engage with and navigate the complexities of the evolving media landscape, enabling them to harness the potential of new media technologies for societal empowerment and engagement. After thoroughly reading this Block, the next time you watch primetime television news, read an editorial, or are glued to a commercial, you will definitely gain more insights while understanding its contents.

UNIT 1 INTERPRETING MEDIA CONTENT
Interpreting Media
Content Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Learning Outcomes
1.2 Comprehending the Differences of Various Media
1.2.1 Traditional Media
1.2.2 Print
1.2.3 Radio
1.2.4 Television
1.2.5 Social Media
1.2.6 Special Characteristics of Social Media
1.3 Impact of Characteristics of Different Forms of Media
1.3.1 Print
1.3.2 Changing Trends of Print Media
1.3.3 Radio
1.3.4 Changing Trends in Radio
1.3.5 FM Radio
1.3.6 Towards Community Radio
1.3.7 Television
1.3.8 Changing Trends in Television
1.3.9 Impact of Advertising on Television
1.3.10 Impact of Changing Trends in Traditional Media
1.3.11 Uncharted Growth of Social Media
1.3.12 New Challenges of Media
1.4 Authenticity of Media Content
1.4.1 Fake News
1.4.2 Paid News
1.4.3 Convenient Symbolism and its Impact
1.4.4 Nanoisation of Content
1.4.5 Iconisation
1.4.6 Stereotyping
1.5 Fact Checking and Self-Driven Code of Ethics
1.5.1 Googling Facts
1.5.2 Checking Websites
1.5.3 Need for Self-Driven Skills
1.6 Activities with Friends and Colleagues
1.7 Let Us Sum Up
1.8 Further Readings
1.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers

Mobile Transition 1.0 INTRODUCTION As you have joined this course on Digital Media Literacy, you may have sometimes wondered how all this will help you in your life. Simply put, how does the literacy of alphabets or numbers help us?! In today's world, media literacy has now become as important as primary literacy. You have been exposed a lot until now, whether it is Paid News or issues of representation. In this Unit, we will look into some of the nuances of media linked to what you have understood until now. Every form of media has its characteristics that impact how it is used. Every form of media is also a part of changing times. That creates trends and changes in the characteristics. Today, changing media is a volatile scenario to which we must be very sensitive and alert. This Unit is a small step in that direction.
1.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand nuanced aspects of various forms of media; * Develop critical thinking to discern media content; and * Imbibe basic ability to consume and share information responsibly.
1.2 COMPREHENDING THE DIFFERENCES OF
VARIOUS MEDIA
The big challenge today is to fully comprehend traditional media and then grasp parts of new media, known as social media. That is a prerequisite for each of us to become * critical and sensible consumers of information * responsible producers / 'sharers' of information * using the appropriate platform of media for sharing information What do we mean by these two words, traditional and social media? Well, tradition is everything that has been around for some time, and now everything that follows rapidly after that. The important point to remember is that as new forms of media develop, older social media are becoming a part of traditional media! This is a field where definitions and parameters change constantly, and we need to be constantly alert and up-to-date.
1.2.1 Traditional Media
Let us classify some of this to keep the lines clear. We will first look at traditional media, which includes: * Print * Radio * Television

1.2.2 Print Interpreting Media
Content Print includes newspapers, magazines, journals, tabloids and so on. Here, we get short reports, long features, editorial comments and articles with or without pictures. The biggest advantage of print media is that if we do not understand something fully or wish to re-look at a previous reference, the possibility is available. The disadvantage of print is those who are illiterate are deprived of all the information that comes out in print. However, around the world, people have built mechanisms to overcome this. For example, in rural areas, people gather around a person who reads the daily newspaper to them.
1.2.3 Radio
Radio is considered to have the widest reach across boundaries, including that of illiteracy. Radio signals can reach remote areas and are useful for disaster and conflict management. In comparison to print, radio can bring us the voices of people around whom a programme is made. This makes it more personal and, therefore, more appealing than print.
1.2.4 Television
Television has the greater possibility of bringing us images with voices. So, we get the feeling of witnessing an event. Unfortunately, in recent years, like in India, the character of television has become more studio-oriented. We see live footage only of political, sensational, criminal or major disaster occurrences, not news of human interest, innovative practices or alternative interventions that impact climate, etc.
1.2.5 Social Media
A little ahead, we will look at how the basic characteristics of these traditional media, along with other factors, guide and influence the content they carry. Before that, we talked of social media, which is essentially in the virtual world and linked to computers, the Internet, and mobile phones. The most familiar platforms are: * Facebook * X (formerly Twitter) * Instagram * WhatsApp * Tumblr * Flickr * YouTube
1.2.6 Special Characteristics of Social Media
The word 'social' defines the primary characteristic of these media compared to traditional media. Traditional media is a one-way communication from the writer/speaker to an audience or masses. This is why it is often called 'mass' media. In contrast, social media is in the hands of 'society' - people like you

Mobile Transition and me. Anyone can use a social media platform. They do not need a job with a newspaper, radio station or television channel to convey their information. This primary characteristic gives every individual 'power' like we never had before. This is also why it is critical to use these platforms responsibly. It used to be said that something published in a newspaper or broadcast on radio/television is like a Bible truth. Increasingly, the information passed around on social media is being viewed similarly. Unfortunately, that is a dangerous trend because not all information producers and sharers are careful of their content's veracity. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. In about 100 words, define what you understand as Traditional Media
and Social Media, highlighting one major difference.

2. Name a few Traditional and Social Media forms and mention which you
use daily.

1.3 IMPACT OF CHARACTERISTICS OF
DIFFERENT FORMS OF MEDIA
Now, we look at how the basic characteristics of different forms of media can guide content. We also examine the motivated/commercial/corporate factors that interfere with media content.
1.3.1 Print
A newspaper, magazine, tabloid, etc., has several pages over which content is presented with text and pictures. Additionally, print media can highlight/draw attention to various stories differently. It can be the front page/lead story, editorial/comment page, or specific theme page (world/business/arts/sports, etc.). As a result, print -

* can provide us with a wide variety of content, out of which we can Interpreting Media Content choose to read what interests us * it can give us combinations of short and long reports on various aspects of a story, with bulleted snippets of information in boxes, pictures that partly visually depict the story * it gives us the possibility to glance through and focus on or jump to the section that interests us
1.3.2 Changing Trends of Print Media
In the context of the above points, Print Media maintained high professionalism before television, and now social media has become the frontline media platform. Subsequently, competition with other media cornered print media into choices that would help to hold up its readership. Some of those factors that changed the character of print media are * declining readership meant turning to sensationalism to attract the reader * needing a higher quantum of advertising to sustain themselves * Both these factors resulted in a scenario where * the slant of a story could be 'twisted' to grab the reader's eye, particularly in a headline * this often results in misconceptions even if the full story subsequently provides the 'truth.' * behind-the-scenes 'relationships' between the editorial and advertising departments with advertisers give pulls and pushes that affect the representation of a story * these can even be unconsciously reflected in a story due to undefined peer influence on thoughts that occur in informal associations Recently, the worldwide phenomenon in media is the deep association of media owners with politicians and industrialists. This has affected print media as much as television. Though print media journalists still carry a lot of credibility, many continue to struggle against lobbies and do their work ethically despite pressures.
1.3.3 Radio
Radio can provide as much diversity as print if running a full-time service. Other factors pre-determine the content of radio. Stories need to be of two kinds: * relevant to the immediate environment of the listener because it is usually heard in the personal confines of the home * informative about the world, particularly for those who do not have access to news due to geographical constraints For effective radio programming, the presenters and those who are included in interviews/discussions/expert views / etc., need to be people with

Mobile Transition * good voices and diction * clarity of thought to speak 'volumes' in crisp sentences and short expositions/answers * pleasant to establish a warm relationship through sound waves
1.3.4 Changing Trends in Radio
Unlike print and television, the commercial / advertising sector's impact on radio was, by and large, different. Unless supported by the state or some strong institution, radio stations as we knew them faded out. Those radio stations had well-researched, keenly thought-out, listener-interest-oriented diverse programmes that would inform/educate, entertain, and give continuous descriptive, on-the-spot sports commentaries. The cricket and Republic Day commentaries were perfect examples of crossing borders until television took over. Even so, the power of radio did not die out. It metamorphosed into a more popular form that became a part of people's daily lives, such as FM Radio. With FM, the 'diversity' of radio is split into sub-sectors. This means we have FM stations for every kind of 'need'. It could be music, sports, cinema, food, a particular location (town/city), elderly, youth, etc. The diversity of FM stations worldwide is immense, and many have been running successfully until now.
1.3.5 FM Radio
Depending on the specific circumstances, FM Radio, even if governed by commercial pressures, is less susceptible to being influenced by lobbies than print and radio. This is usually because FM stations almost invariably have the possibility of phone-ins, and the public can interject and 'expose' facts, which may or may not be acceptable to the ownership. This powerful aspect of radio cannot be undermined because it gives radio a greater democratic character than print and television, with an added dimension of energetic, immediate communication between those who disseminate and those who consume information.
1.3.6 Towards Community Radio
It was natural that some serious social issues would be neglected in such a situation because it had less chance of grabbing a popular listener base. In its organic way, radio developed the concept of community radio, which has become a strong component of radio as we know it today. Governments and the public (community) are struggling with the laws that can give community radio a comprehensive form. When it does, it still has the potential to give more depth and voice to society's concerns than print and television. This is particularly so in climate change, disaster management, grassroots developmental issues and issues linked to vulnerable / marginalised groups/ communities, particularly women.

1.3.7 Television Interpreting Media
Content Due to its popularity essentially based on the power and attraction of moving images, television became the 'first' face of media over print and radio. Its potential to bring the world to our drawing room created an underlying change in people's consciousness. We developed a sense of being global citizens and imbibed diversity due to the various nations and cultures we began seeing on television. This has been the biggest contribution of television.
1.3.8 Changing Trends in Television
Compared to a long history of sustained dependability and appeal of information of print and radio, television lost its credibility in a shorter span of time. In its initial phases, public service was the guiding motto of television. In later years, it was a struggle for states to maintain their public service nature. The competition of private satellite channels quickly changed the character of television worldwide.
1.3.9 Impact of Advertising on Television
Advertising made the greatest impact as it gravitated away from print and radio and toward television. This soon made television more of a business venture than a source of credible information and public service. As this business component grew rapidly and exponentially, industrialists saw television as a good business proposition. This development led to another quiet, somewhat unhealthy change that insidiously sunk into the television system. The use of television channels for political agendas is now more a norm than an exception. This impacted print because media moguls also wished to control newspapers. The era when newspaper editors had their journalistic freedom has increasingly become a precious and often rare phenomenon.
1.3.10 Impact of Changing Trends in Traditional Media
The overall impact of the various factors mentioned above is deep and critical. The power of business and media has overpowered the world of public media content. Society * no longer knows what to believe and what not to believe * is often deprived of the kind of content they wish to have * are almost bullied into becoming habitual consumers of skewed or slanted content that is imposed upon them * have nearly no say in how these circumstances can be changed because they have no powers This was bound to create turmoil, and society would respond. Technology helped that happen. Social media has become the great media leveller of this century. Media can no longer be defined as content from one source sent to many. It is a two-way communication of content, which can multiply with

Mobile Transition shares, forwards, and algorithms. With time, social media has also triggered headline stories in traditional media.
1.3.11 Uncharted Growth of Social Media
At first, this seems to be the perfect solution. After all, what could be better than ourselves being in charge of what we want to read, see and communicate? The catch is right here. At an individual level, almost none of us is equipped to * research our facts * write with clarity * Take pictures/videos that follow the rules for framing, lighting, etc. * be responsible enough not to share content that can cause any form of unease or disturbance to individuals/groups/communities/society at large * utilise the correct medium to convey our content This is the reason why there is a lot of turmoil associated with the use of social media.
1.3.12 New Challenges of Media
The biggest plus point of social media, particularly YouTube and shared videos, is sharing content previously limited to a few people. Today, we learn much more about health, lifestyle, diet, and spiritual matters than in recent years. This enables society to make choices that they may not have been able to without such immense online content. On the negative side, like traditional media, social media also has ownership, which is almost monopolistic. So, we and all our content on social media are in the hands and power of powerful people whose platforms rule the world. These platforms are heavily driven by advertising, which has its pitfalls. This can prove quite dangerous in a way, as we have seen in the case of the Facebook data breach. In short, the challenge for traditional media has become credibility, and the challenge for social media is facts and privacy. Societies and governments worldwide need to address both these issues. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. In 100 words, EACH defines what you understand as print, radio, and
television characteristics.

2. Mention one plus and one minus point for Print, Radio, and Television Interpreting Media
Content and their reasons.

3. Write a short essay of 250 words on why you think Social Media has
become popular.

1.4 AUTHENTICITY OF MEDIA CONTENT
Due to a combination of all the facts mentioned above, the authenticity of media content is our biggest challenge. How do we know that the content we read, hear, and see is true? How do we know that we are not victims of subconscious messaging? How do we know that we perceive content in a particular way because it has been presented in a specific way? While several points related to this can fill a whole essay or book, we will look at a few that are critical for us to understand as information consumers. Fake News, Paid News, Iconisation and Stereotyping are some of them.
1.4.1 Fake News
Those who work in or with the media belong to the same society as us and have the same strengths and weaknesses. Fake News is usually a tool used by vested interests (who may or may not have direct links with the media) and consistently wish to harm/demolish/destroy/eliminate an individual/ institution. They will use any means to achieve this end, including sting operations that excite us like an investigative, spy-like thriller. Fake News has become a popular element in politics and runs across traditional and social media. It can be a motivating story in a newspaper or on television or content that goes viral on Facebook or WhatsApp.
1.4.2 Paid News
Paid News has a similar 'bad' aura but is often used in more complicated situations. It could influence the government to adopt a particular policy or product. Or it could be used to ensure certain people are placed in the right top positions in major ministries, institutions, and organisations. Paid news can be used by corporations, multinational companies, and politicians to

Mobile Transition achieve whatever they wish.
1.4.3 Convenient Symbolism and its Impact
In the media context, nanoisation, Iconisation and Stereotyping are symptoms of today's times. Increasingly, those working for traditional media face the pressures of * time * breaking a story first * conveying the 'slant' of a story in the quickest way And those who use social media like to use * short forms of words and bad spellings are becoming a norm * smileys of all kinds to convey words Nanoisation, Iconisation and Stereotyping help for all of these.
1.4.4 Nanoisation of Content
What is Nanoisation? Nano is very small. So, while we easily share very long messages others send on WhatsApp, it is not the same when we write original content ourselves. There is a rush to convey information quickly in the shortest time. It suits everybody because attention spans have greatly reduced, and people want to 'get the message' quickly.
1.4.5 Iconisation
What do we mean by Iconisation? Iconisation is the use of a symbol to convey a complete meaning. A cake is an icon for a birthday, or the Eiffel Tower is an icon for Paris / France. This is a technique that was originally adopted by the advertising world. It has now spread to all kinds of content across all media. The result is essentially * a rapidly decreasing diversity in images that convey specific concepts * inappropriateness with the real lives of people in many parts of the world For example, an ad for a shampoo will invariably have a fair woman with long, glossy hair. So, the image of beauty in our mind is perpetually linked to a fair face. An ad for a spice or cooking oil often has a family around a table with eight to ten steaming dishes. So, again, the image of a healthy life is embedded with so many dishes on the dining table. Neither of these applies to the lives of many darker-skinned or poor people in the world.
1.4.6 Stereotyping
Stereotyping carries similar aspects and largely affects how we view women, communities, races, and nations. Projecting images with guns and certain kinds of flags stamps an image of a particular type of people belonging to a particular religion. Depicting women in certain ways creates an image of women as a sexual object. Emphasising a particular colour gives an image a

context of a particular political party or country. Interpreting Media Content As we can see, it is a real challenge to grasp the authenticity of the content beyond the canonisation, iconisation and stereotyping we receive across various forms of media. The more we learn to research and analyse the content, the better informed we can be. That is a demand of present and future times. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the challenges related to the authenticity of media content?
Write in bullet points.

2. State one of your examples of each of the following:
Fake News
Paid News
Navigation Iconisation Stereotyping
1.5 FACT CHECKING AND SELF-DRIVEN
CODE OF ETHICS
It is not easy to authenticate media content. After all, in our busy lives with hectic schedules, it is easy to say: Where do I have the time to research and find the truth? That is true. So, we must learn to restrain ourselves unless we are fully equipped to utilise and share content or create new content.
1.5.1 Googling Facts
There are a few possibilities, and Google is the best way to check facts. It often helps to find the truth quickly. Write relevant words, then a +, and then 'true or false'. This can lead you to hundreds of leads, and your critical thinking will help you find the correct answer. For example, you come across a story that seems big and involves big names. It is a letter on an organisation's letterhead with address, names, telephone numbers and signatures. It looks authentic, but no news about this has ever come out in the public domain. You can type the name of the organisation + one of the names mentioned + whom it is addressed to + fake news or true.

Mobile Transition 1.5.2 Checking Websites
Apart from this, what goes viral on Facebook or WhatsApp is often an old story or from a doubtful source. In the case of a doubtful source, it can have impressive initial words, like BBC or TimesNow. Then, there will be some additional words/alphabet, meaning it is a dubious site. Click on the link and look into the 'About' section; the background will be clear. There will always be a lot of difference in the quality and content of a real BBC site and a fake one. Wikipedia has a list of fake websites: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_fake_news_websites
1.5.3 Need for Self-Driven Skills
As we become burdened with constant media content, we must develop habits, skills, and competencies that make us responsible consumers, sharers, and content creators. We must remember that the content remains in the virtual world and is the legacy we will be leaving behind for our children and grandchildren. That is a big responsibility, and we must understand it as such. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How would you check the authenticity of a message about a health tip
you receive on WhatsApp?

2. What would you do before you share a Facebook post about a particular
community / religious group?

3. What are the three things you would do before posting your own 'story'
or 'comment' on a developing riot situation?

1.6 ACTIVITIES WITH FRIENDS AND Interpreting Media
Content
COLLEAGUES:
1. Close your eyes and think of a day without access to media. Discuss and
make notes.
2. Buy two daily newspapers in English and two languages for each group
member. Identify news and ads that have used Iconisation and Stereotyping to convey a story.
3. Create a four-sentence message for WhatsApp and write it in full form
using nanoisation. Discuss the two versions.
4. Each person views one English and one language television channel in
the evening at prime time. The next day, discuss your views on fake and paid news aspects.
5. Pick a religious issue and discuss how you would NOT present it on
Social Media and three reasons for not doing so.
6. Pick one issue and discuss how and why it would be presented
differently in Print, Radio and Television.
1.7 LET US SUM UP
We have looked at the characteristics, changing trends and their impact on various forms of media. All these are important components of how you and I perceive media content. Undoubtedly, our own beliefs and life experiences play a role in how we perceive that content. We hope this Unit becomes a part of your life experience as you become critical users, sharers, and creators of appropriate content.
1.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bordoloi, A., & Srimathi, S. P. (2021). The Condescending and
Misogynistic Portrayal of Women in Media. KnowEx Social Sciences,
1(02), 1-10. https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type= pdf&doi=193005d2f634c435863ff707bf660047f980ed58
2. Brooks, D. E., & Hebert, L. P. (2006). Gender, race, and media
representation. Handbook of gender and communication, 16, 297-317. https://focusintl.com/GD142- %20Gender,%20Race%20and%20Media%20Representation.pdf
3. Castaneda, M. (2018). The power of (mis) representation: Why racial
and ethnic stereotypes in the media matter. Challenging inequalities: Readings in race, ethnicity, and immigration. https://scholarworks.umass.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1059&conte xt=communication_faculty_pubs
4. Dame Adjin-Tettey, T. (2022). Combating fake news, disinformation,
and misinformation: Experimental evidence for media literacy education. Cogent arts & humanities, 9(1), 2037229. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/23311983.2022.2037229

Mobile Transition 5. Hobbs, R. (2021). Media literacy in action: Questioning the media. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
6. Hoewe, J., & Ewoldsen, D. R. (2024). The Media Use Model: A
metatheoretical framework for media processes and effects. Human Communication Research, 50(2), 254-263.7. Jansson, A., & Lindell, J. (2018). Media studies for a mediatized world:
Rethinking media and social space. Media and communication, 6(2), 1-4. https://www.ssoar.info/ssoar/bitstream/handle/document/57810/ssoar- mediacomm-2018-2-jansson_et_al- Media_studies_for_a_mediatized.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y&lnkna me=ssoar-mediacomm-2018-2-jansson_et_al- Media_studies_for_a_mediatized.pdf
8. Kargin, T., & Demir, R. (2023). Empowering Children's Media Literacy
in the YouTube Era: Insights into Critical Awareness. International
Journal of Research in Teacher Education (IJRTE), 14(3). https://ijrte.inased.org/files/5/manuscript/manuscript_4038/ijrte-4038- manuscript-001552.pdf
9. Rizvi, Y., & Kuznetsova, E. (2023). The Politics of Representation:
Examining Media Portrayals in Social Science Literature. The Critical
Review of Social Sciences Studies, 1(02), 122-132. https://thecrsss.com/index.php/Journal/article/download/12/12
10. Silverblatt, A., Miller, D. C., Smith, J., & Brown, N. (2014). Media
literacy: Keys to interpreting media messages. Bloomsbury Publishing USA.
1.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress 1:
1. Traditional media refers to established forms of mass communication,
such as newspapers, television, radio, and magazines. These platforms typically involve one-way communication from the sender (the media organization) to the receiver (the audience). In contrast, social media encompasses online platforms and applications that facilitate interactive and user-generated content, allowing individuals to create, share, and engage with content in a bidirectional manner. One major difference between the two is the level of interactivity and user participation inherent in social media, which is often absent in traditional media.
2. Examples of traditional media include newspapers like The New York
Times, television networks such as CNN, radio stations like BBC Radio, and magazines like National Geographic. On the other hand, social media platforms encompass Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and LinkedIn. A daily user engage with social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter, while also consuming traditional media through online news portals.

Check Your Progress 2: Interpreting Media
Content
1. Characteristics of Print, Radio, and Television
a. Print: Print media refers to materials that are physically printed and distributed, such as newspapers, magazines, and books. Its characteristics include static content, longevity, and tangibility. Print allows for in-depth analysis, archival value, and a sense of credibility due to its traditional nature. b. Radio: Radio is an auditory medium that broadcasts audio content over the airwaves. Its characteristics include immediacy, intimacy, and accessibility. Radio provides real-time updates, fosters a personal connection with listeners through voice, and is accessible to audiences even in remote areas. c. Television: Television is a visual and auditory medium that broadcasts moving images and sound. Its characteristics include visual impact, immediacy, and widespread reach. Television engages audiences through dynamic visuals, delivers news and entertainment in real-time, and reaches a broad demographic.
2. Strengths and Weaknesses of Print, Radio, and Television
a. Print: Plus point: Print offers in-depth analysis and credibility. Minus point: Its distribution can be limited, and it lacks immediacy compared to other mediums. b. Radio: Plus point: Radio provides real-time updates and is accessible. Minus point: It lacks visual content and can be affected by signal issues. c. Television: Plus point: Television engages audiences with dynamic visuals and widespread reach. Minus point: It can be expensive to produce and relies heavily on advertising revenue.
3. The Popularity of Social Media: Social media has become popular due to
its ability to connect people globally, facilitate instant communication, and offer a platform for self-expression. With social media, individuals can share their thoughts, experiences, and content in various formats such as text, images, and videos. Its interactive nature encourages engagement, fostering communities and relationships beyond geographical boundaries. Moreover, social media platforms offer personalized content tailored to users' interests, enhancing user experience and retention. Additionally, the accessibility of social media through smartphones and other devices has contributed to its widespread adoption. However, concerns about privacy, misinformation, and digital addiction highlight the need for responsible usage and regulation of social media platforms. Check Your Progress 3:
1. Challenges related to the authenticity of media content:
a. Misinformation: Deliberate spread of false information to deceive audiences. b. Disinformation: False information spread with the intent to

Mobile Transition manipulate public opinion or cause harm. c. Manipulated Content: Images, videos, or audio altered to misrepresent reality. d. Echo Chambers: Social media algorithms reinforcing existing beliefs by filtering content. e. Confirmation Bias: Individuals seeking out information that confirms their pre-existing beliefs. f. Lack of Verification: Failure to verify sources or fact-check information before publication. g. Deep Fakes: AI-generated content that convincingly mimics real people, used for deceptive purposes.
2. Examples:
a. Fake News: A fabricated story claiming a celebrity's death. b. Paid News: A news article promoting a particular political candidate paid for by their campaign. c. Navigation: Biased framing of a news story to influence public opinion on a contentious issue. d. Iconization: Exaggerated portrayal of a public figure as a hero without acknowledging their flaws. e. Stereotyping: Depiction of a certain ethnic group in a film as criminals, perpetuating harmful stereotypes.

UNIT 2 THE MEDIUM AND THE MESSAGE
The Medium and
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
News Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 Media Codes and Conventions: Concept and Definition
2.2.1 Defining and Identifying Media Codes
2.2.2 Defining Media Conventions
2.2.3 Relevance of Media Codes and Conventions
2.3 Relevance of Codes and Conventions in the News Genre
2.4 Codes and Conventions for Print News/ Newspapers
2.4.1 Writing Style
2.4.2 Page Layout
2.5 Codes and Conventions for Radio News
2.5.1 Radio News Formats
2.5.2 Codes for Radio News
2.5.3 Conventions in Radio News
2.6 Codes and Conventions for Television News
2.6.1 Visual Codes in Television News
2.6.2 Audio Codes in Television News
2.6.3 Conventions in Television News
2.7 Codes and Conventions of News Websites
2.7.1. Codes Used in a News Website
2.7.2. Conventions of a News Website
2.8 Let Us Sum Up
2.9 Further Readings
2.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
2.0 INTRODUCTION
In the previous Unit, you learnt how messages are coded in media and information texts. The messages in media texts can have obvious and, at times, connotations. In this Unit, we will focus on the medium and the messages it carries, specifically for the news genre. Here, we will start with the characteristics of the different media forms used to disseminate news. This is very basic yet important in understanding media messages. The characteristics of the medium influence the message it carries. A medium's strengths and limitations can potentially dictate the framework in which the message is developed. So, every medium has specific ways of developing and codifying a message for easier understanding on the receiver's end.

Mobile Transition Hence, this Unit introduces the basic codes and standard conventions used by the print, broadcast, and online media to deliver news effectively to their audiences. We treat news here as a communication of information. A basic understanding of these codes and conventions for preparing and delivering news will help you better create and analyse news stories, which is imperative for news literacy.
2.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Define media codes and conventions * Identify the codes and conventions of news used in Newspapers o Radio o Television o Websites o * Appreciate the relevance of the codes and conventions of the news genre * Critically analyse the news presentation in print/TV/Radio/Websites
2.2 MEDIA CODES AND CONVENTIONS:
CONCEPT AND DEFINITION
Look around you; don't you find yourself surrounded by media texts? We are soaking in information actively and, yes ... also passively. The photographs in the magazine, the illustrations in the hoardings, the news story in the newspaper, the colours used on a website, the camera angle and frames in a video, the audio in the music, etc., all make you feel or act in a certain way. A media text is developed using language specific to the medium. This language comprises the codes, conventions, formats, symbols, and narrative structure suitable for the medium. Hence, the associated meanings can sometimes be obvious or not so obvious. Codes and conventions are like the building blocks of the media messages that we receive. An understanding of them helps us code the messages and decode them well.
2.2.1 Defining and Identifying Media Codes
Let's start with an example. You are in a restaurant and need to use the restroom. How do you find out where it is? When you find it, how do you recognise which restroom to use? Look for some indications like the one below.
Image Source: Pixabay.com

No matter where you go, a sign like this signifies the restroom. The Medium and
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
Codes are a system of signs which, when put together, create some meaning. News A code should have the following attributes to ensure its comprehension. They are: * Using signs that are easily recognisable at the receiver's end is important. * It should also have a context. Meaning is derived from a sign when some context is provided to it. For example, a cross can signify Christianity, the medical profession, or addiction. The context in which it is placed imparts meaning to it. Media codes fall into the following three categories: a) Technical codes: Techniques used in the creation of the media text. b) Written codes: Everything that is spoken and written. c) Symbolic codes: The connotations of the technical and written codes.
2.2.2 Defining Media Conventions
Media conventions are a standard way to use the media codes in the text. This can act as a governing behaviour for media production in the industry. Media conventions followed in developing media text can be as follows: a) Form conventions guide the arrangement of codes in media text. This structuring can be achieved through elements of a page layout in print media, sequencing of shots in a movie, etc. b) Story conventions: These are narrative structures used when telling a story. It can be built around cause and effect, a point of view, etc. c) Genre conventions: These are the repetitive elements, like character, story arcs, etc., that make a work peculiar to a specific genre. For example, sci-fi is a genre that will have characters like scientists. Codes and conventions are fashioned together in media texts to sell an idea or present something in a desired light to make you feel in a particular way.
2.2.3 Relevance of Media Codes and Conventions
When Marshall McLuhan said, 'The Medium is the message, ' he tried to emphasise the symbiotic relationship between the message and its embedded medium. This relationship has a practical and functional aspect. a) It is practical because a medium's attributes set the boundaries for creating a message. For example, a newspaper cannot carry audio-video content. b) The message is about what is being said and how it is said. How it is said affects how the message is perceived. A set of codes and conventions works behind it to design messages to communicate the intended meaning.

Mobile Transition 2.3 RELEVANCE OF CODES AND
CONVENTIONS IN THE NEWS GENRE
Codes and conventions offer a pattern and hints to grasp the meaning of the text. The codes and conventions used while designing a message for news media can construct reality, identity, ideology, consciousness, stereotypes, misrepresentation, underrepresentation, etc. An extensive familiarity with these patterns results in a more intricate thought process and interpretations.
1. It can help a journalist to create balanced and fair news reports.
2. It can help the audience critically analyse a news story. Consequently, it
is valuable to identify and tackle misinformation, propaganda, stereotypes, etc. Thus, knowing the codes and conventions used in the news media is imperative to follow the news better, talk about it and write it better. This news literacy will help me understand the news discourse critically. Before we move ahead to explore the codes and conventions used in print and broadcast news, it is important to keep in mind that the codes and conventions used in a media accordingly adapt to the : * purpose of communication, * type of effect that is desired, * audiences, * contexts and * the kind of media used. For the news genre, the general purpose of news is to inform the audiences objectively. The context is provided in the details of the news. The 'written code' deals with the language style dictated by the journalistic norms for providing objective and unbiased information. These journalistic styles: * It helps to structure a news story according to the news value. * It ties in with the existing editing practices in the news industry, considering the news consumption patterns and habits of the readers/ audiences. The attributes of the news media affect the delivery of the news item and the kind of codes used. With this understanding, we will now learn the conventions of preparing and delivering a news item using the most suitable media codes according to the attributes of the news media.
2.4 CODES AND CONVENTIONS FOR PRINT
NEWS/ NEWSPAPERS
Newspapers have been the most popular and credible source of information in print media. The news items can be categorised into the following

journalistic categories: The Medium and
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
a) News Stories: Short and concise facts about a recent event with a news News value. It is written in an inverted pyramid style. b) Features: Provide an in-depth analysis or significance of a news/ human angle story. They are written in a linear or nonlinear standard outline format, usually with a conclusion. c) Editorials: Fact-based opinions from in-house editors. It objectively explains an issue to oppose or refute it. d) Reviews: Subjective, honest critique based on opinion. Usually, it has a recommendation for readers. All of these follow a specific news writing format that follows journalistic guidelines. Now that you can identify the types of news items in a newspaper, we will explore the basic elements of a news story and how they are structured. Activity 1: Pick up a daily newspaper and try to identify News stories Features Editorials Reviews
2.4.1 Writing Style
The written code comprises writing style and textual layout. The Indian newspapers follow the basic news writing conventions of the Press Council of India. The news stories are written to inform about a newsworthy event. It is done in the most concise and informative possible way. To do this, there are certain structural elements of a news story. a) Headline: A headline is a crisp and concise news story summary. It draws the reader's attention to the story and helps him decide whether to read further details. Headlines can be supplemented with subheads. b) Intro: The first sentence of the news story summarises the news story. Of the 5W and 1H, you can find at least 3 of them here. The intro is useful because even if the reader leaves the story at this point, he will still have some information about it. c) Body: The story's further details are written in an inverted pyramid style, with the most important information first and the lesser important details following. This format facilitates easy editing for editors in a space crunch. The readers find the information in a hierarchy of importance. d) Quotations/Attributions: Sometimes, the news story mentions what was said about the event by a key person related to it. These are

Mobile Transition mentioned in quotes. A quotation from a reliable source or an eyewitness increases the credibility of the news story. These comprise a news story and are placed according to importance. The most important and newsworthy information is provided below the headline as the lead. This is followed by the body, which provides additional relevant details. The story might end with background info or a conclusion; this is the tail. This convention for the written codes followed in news writing is called the inverted pyramid style. It structures the news story based on the newsworthiness of the associated details. It has been developed and is still used because it guides the reader through the details for a better understanding. However, if the reader does not read the story and leaves mid- way, he still will have the most important information. Structure elements of a news story written in an inverted pyramid style. (Source: The Indian Express) A news story always carries the source of the news below the headline. It can be as a news agency's byline ( name of the correspondent) name. Following it is the dateline, which mentions the place and date of writing. It is always advisable to look for the news source for its credibility. Activity - 2 Pick up a newspaper and analyse the topmost story to see how it is written. How is it structured? Can you identify the elements like headline, intro, dateline, and byline? Does the story have attributions? In which part of the story is it located?

2.4.2 Page Layout The Medium and
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
We need to see how these stories are placed in a newspaper. A newspaper's News layout uses technical codes and considers the audience's expectations on the page. Knowing its conventions will allow you to interpret it and ensure that the message is decoded as it should be.
Page Layout Considerations
* Space: After the ads are placed on a page, the space left is called the news hole. This is where the news stories are placed. The news stories are placed in stacks of text called columns. The uppermost part is occupied by a masthead where you find the newspaper's title. It is the biggest attention seeker on the front page. Rest space is utilised for news stories according to their value. Besides this, you can also find blank white spaces between texts, text columns, and other elements used in a news story. This is white space. It provides breathing spaces, avoids clutter, and improves readability and comprehension. A jump line is a short phrase appearing at the end of a column. It indicates that the story will continue on a subsequent page. It is used to manage space when a news story does not fit in the space allocated on the front page. It helps to make space for other news stories. Interested readers can navigate to the story for more information. * Hierarchy: The most important stories are placed above the fold, while an anchor story is at the base to keep the readers on the page for a while. The news stories are placed according to their newsworthiness, even above the fold. The lead story, Splash, stands out as the most prominent story on the front page. It can be identified by the amount of space it occupies and the font type used. It symbolises the importance of the story. The second most important story is called the off lead, which could be found parallel to the splash but could be identified by the lesser space and font relative to the lead. Headlines indicate the importance of a story by working with font attributes like size, type, colour, etc. The way a headline is laid also has a purpose, like banner headlines, crossline headlines, flush left headlines, kickers, hammers, etc. Hence, headlines not only introduce the news story but also cues towards the importance of the story. * Images & Size: Images can also be part of the news story. They act as proof of what has happened and supplement what is written. They also break the monotony of the text and make the page attractive and more appealing to the readers. A good picture would be relevant to the context and meaningful. Apart from images, infographics or other illustrations are also used depending on the story's needs.

Mobile Transition Captions are used to describe the images/illustrations used. The use of images/illustrations with suitable captions helps present the story better, attempts to take the readers to the event scene, and helps them understand it better3. * Colour: The conventional way is dark text on a light background, like black on white. Some newspapers can use colours to enhance their aesthetics and make them more appealing. Coloured headlines can also make a specific story stand out from the rest. However, the news media is divided on the use of colours in newspapers. You can find newspapers that use colours to aid readership but also mind that it is not getting flashy (losing their serious tone). How a newspaper is perceived depends greatly on the layout and the colours used. It sets a tone for what they stand for. It can be clearly understood from a quote by an editor from The Times: Page layout elements of the front page of a newspaper (Source: The New Indian Express) "This is a paper to be read . . . not (just) looked at," The layout convention followed by a newspaper is called the house style. It 34 represents the identity and sets the tone of the newspaper.

Activity - 3 The Medium and
the Message: Print
Take a daily newspaper and analyse the layout of its front page and Broadcast News What elements can you identify on the front page? Does this layout resemble how the inner pages are laid? Can you make some inferences about the brand identity and tone of the newspaper?
2.5 CODES AND CONVENTION FOR RADIO
NEWS
Radio, unlike print and television, relies only on sound. No visual cues can enhance the understanding of the audio message. The content on the radio consists of spoken words, music, and sound effects. Spoken words are central to radio content, and how they are spoken can add a layer of meaning. Sound is central to all the codes and conventions used to generate radio content. The kind of sound, its combinations, modulation, and even its absence are used to create meaning on the radio and in newscasts. Before you move to the codes and conventions of radio news, it will be helpful to know that only All India Radio (AIR) has the right to broadcast news in India.
2.5.1 Radio News Formats
The news on the radio is presented in three formats. a) News bulletins: These are 5---to 10-minute broadcasts with headlines and signature archival music. They are lively, crisp, and concise. An example is the 6 a.m. bulletin on AIR. b) New magazine: These are the longer newscasts, usually around 30 minutes. They begin with a bulletin and discuss it in detail. They might include talks, interviews, discussions, features, reviews, expert comments, etc. The afternoon news on AIR is an example of a news magazine. c) Newsreel: These are recorded supplements to the news bulletin. They can be voice dispatches from the correspondent, actuality, comments from key people in the news, analysis, etc. They can be found embedded in news magazines. The News and Radio Newsreel By BBC was a 15- minute newsreel broadcast four times daily.
2.5.2 Codes for Radio News
Written codes: The news script for radio follows the news writing guidelines prescribed by the Press Council of India to uphold journalistic norms. But considering that radio exits in time. A reader cannot go back, nor are there any visual cues to assist comprehension; it is advised to : i. Use short and simple sentences.

Mobile Transition ii. Use active voice to describe what the subject is doing/has done. iii. Do not use the relative clauses as they can break the flow of the sentence. Consider the following line from a radio news story. 'A group of Students who are from Central Hindu School won the
International Math Olympiad.'
Statements like this should be rewritten by removing the relative clause "who". Technical codes: These are the technical processes involved in creating content for radio news, like recording, editing, and mixing. The way (news genre convention) these sounds are recorded, mixed, and structured in a newscast creates symbolic codes for the listeners. Symbolic codes: Pitch patterns help listeners identify the beginning and end of the story. They can also inform about the story's length, seriousness, and even credibility. Generally, the newsreader begins a statement on a high pitch and ends on a lower pitch. An exception is an interrogative statement, where the pitch rises at the end of the statement. Presence, co-presence or absence of sounds are also cues for the listener. For example, a signature tune is played in the background with the headlines but not when the news is read in detail. This background tune instantly reminds us that we are in the headlines without being told. Music, sound effects, and recorded or live audio clips are also used to provide cues for better understanding. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the various radio news formats?

2. Why is it not advisable to use clauses in radio news?

2.5.3 Conventions in Radio News The Medium and
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
You will now see how a radio newscast is structured and delivered using News these written, technical and symbolic codes. The basic convention for professional and credible news delivery is to be formal, serious and informative. A radio newscast can have the following elements: * Intro: When a news reader introduces himself, time and the network. * Stinger: It is a short music played at the beginning or end of a report. This can also be used in the headlines segment. * SFX: The music is fading away. * Cue: When the news presenter introduces a report from a correspondent or a sound byte. * Actuality: These are the recordings from the field/interview/speeches. The shorter segments, when picked from it, are called grabs. * Atmos: Ambient sounds from the location where the correspondent is reporting. For example, the sound of people shouting slogans in the background when the reporter is covering a protest. * Audio clips: Pre-recorded interviews, etc., are used in the newscast. * Outro: When the newsreader ends the news broadcast. Using caps in news scripts is a conventional way of providing cues to the newsreader, and it should not be read. However, it has a purpose, such as segment identification for the newsreader and maintaining pace.

The Medium and
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
News Sounders, actuality, and stingers help the listener identify the segment. The runtime for each segment is recorded and mentioned, helping the newsreader pace the newscast. Consider the following example to understand how sound clips(music, SFX, actuality) can be placed symbolically in news stories and how they improve listening comprehension and experience. We are using a template script/package of the 'Morning News' presented on AIR. A basic understanding of these radio news codes and conventions will help you to use them intelligently when creating or analysing radio news. Activity - 4 Listen to the All India Radio newscast. Can you identify the radio news format? What kind of sounds can you identify during the newscast? What was the outro used by the newsreader?

Mobile Transition 2.6 CODES AND CONVENTIONS FOR
TELEVISION NEWS
Understanding television as a medium will help one grasp the codes and conventions of television news. Television is an audio-visual medium, so using the various technical, written and symbolic codes is easier. These codes provide audio or visual cues or even both. Thus, making the information more presentable makes it easy to understand. Rather than directly defining the codes and the conventions, here we take the other way around. Let us try to look for the audio and visual cues in television news and their relevance that aim to make comprehension better for the audiences.
2.6.1 Visual Codes in Television News
What do you first observe when viewing a television news report? Visuals...right? This is where a lot of symbolic codes are embedded. What is it that you see on your screen? * The news presenter presents the news in a specific mode of address, * The set, * The animate/animate text on the screen. Have a close look at the following screenshots from News at Ten on DD News. The opening frame shows the segment's name with the DD news logo and news scroller at the bottom, helping to identify the news programme. Coupled with the sounder5 in the background typography, the red colour establishes its brand identity. A sequential analysis of the graphics, colour, and images, along with the music, pace, opening camera shot, studio setup, mise-en-scene, and mode of address, helps uncover the symbolically coded brand identity and the expectations created by the news telecast. The opening frame of the News is at ten on DD news. (Source: DD News) The next frame has the news presenter who introduces the news stories. The news stories are sequenced in the order of their newsworthiness. Analysing the television news telecast can help you understand the visual and verbal news codes.

1. The number of elements in the frame and their placement comprise the The Medium and
the Message: Print
visual codes of composition. For example, the presenter is mostly in the
and Broadcast
centre of the frame, dressed formally and addressing the camera directly. News This connotes authority and seriousness from the source. You can also spot a strapline at the bottom of the screen where you can see the news headlines trails.
2. The movement of the camera and the subject is also part of the visual
code. The basic convention is to use an establishing shot, long shot, mid shot, and closeup. The pan movements also incorporate greater details from the event spot.
3. The sequence in which the visual content is structured also adds meaning
to what is being said. Here, sequencing deals with editing the visual content to change shots, juxtapose images, and organise them according to what is being said by the news reader or the reporter. A news report can have interviews, vox pop, actual footage from the spot, images, sound clips, animated graphics, etc. A well-judged sequencing of these elements can break monotony and facilitate comprehension for the audience. Opening frame of The news at 10( Source: DD News)
2.6.2 Audio Codes in Television News
Remember, television is an audio-visual medium. The visuals can be empowering, but when used wisely, the verbal cues can reinforce, undercut, or modify the visual elements. The verbal cues in the news follow the conventional narrative and journalistic norms of news report writing, which the presenter reads. * The use of voice-over is a prominent verbal cue used in television news. This is an off-commentary by a reporter that accompanies a sequence of video clips. * The standard out cue is another verbal cue that suggests that the reporter is signing off when they end the story. For example, " Tom Bateman, BBC News Jerusalem".

Mobile Transition 2.6.3 Conventions in Television News
Convention, as already explained, is the standard way to do something. Here, we discuss how television news, consisting of its visual and audio elements, is structured. Writing a news package is a convention for television news6. It lays down how a news story would be told on television. It is similar to a narrative storytelling of what has happened with an intro, details, and an end. It has all the elements like images (moving and still), bytes, VO, NATSO, etc. The package generally begins with an intro from the in-studio-studio anchor. This is followed by the package lead, who has a narrative and visual lead. Like print news, it has a middle with details and an end with a final narrative and visuals. From the Piece to the camera, actual footage can connect the audience to the story by providing visuals directly from the field. Sometimes, infographics make the information more comprehensive for the audience. An anchor tag concludes the story and provides any other related info that was not in the package.

The Medium and
Activity - 5
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
Watch a television news broadcast and record News * The duration * The segments * The audio cues used * The video cues used
2.7 CODES AND CONVENTIONS OF NEWS
WEBSITES
With the change in technology, news moved from print and radio to television and is now available online through our phones and computers. Newspapers have their online editions on their websites. Similarly, radio and television news broadcasters have websites and social media handles. To understand this convergence of news on the internet, it is important to explore the characteristics of the medium and how it is useful for the audiences and the broadcaster. The internet is:
1. Hypertextual: This internet feature helps to interconnect texts through
internal and external hyperlinks. This can help the news provider to embed relevant information and background related to the story through hyperlinks.
2. Multimedia platform: This can help integrate audio, video, text,
images, etc., facilitating innovative ways of storytelling.
3. Interactive: The internet is interactive, unlike traditional media. In news
genre 8, websites can have navigational, functional, and adaptive interactivity. The more interactive the website is, the easier it is for the visitor to get involved with the content.
4. Immediate: On the internet, there is no lag between the relay of the
information and its reception. Considering the timeliness of news, the internet provides a massive advantage in breaking news and updates for a story. The audience need not wait for the news telecast to break a news story or limit themselves to the strapline update of it. It is readily available on the phone app or website. The follow-up is also constantly updated.

Now that we know the characteristics of the internet, it is easier to appreciate how it cuts through the limitations of traditional news media. This helps journalists achieve much more through their websites than through conventional media. For example; * Radio news is devoid of visuals and is aired on a schedule. It needs to catch up in interactivity as well. * The front page of a newspaper has a space limitation, which affects the number of stories and their length. However, the newspaper's online homepage will have no similar restrictions. Thus, we find more headlines on the webpage than on the front page of the same newspaper. The breaking news section on the webpage cannot be found in its print version. The online version of a newspaper will have interactive elements embedded in the story, which is a limitation of its print version. * While television news channels have multimedia elements and immediacy, the hypertextuality (for references and additional info) and interactivity that the internet provides through polls and user-generated content such as comments, connections, and sharing through social networks are missing in television newscasts. * Another attribute is that the stories published on the online version remain, so we can read or even revisit them at our convenience. It's easy to return, which is impossible in broadcast news media.

2.7.1 Codes Used in a News Website The Medium and
the Message: Print
and Broadcast
The written code, again, is guided by journalistic guidelines. News The technical code can be spotted in how a website's news is created and laid out. Similar technical codes might be found in print and television. Videos and social media handles relevant to the story are commonly found. Other multimedia tools, including timelines, maps, slideshows, word clouds, etc. (BBC, Journalism CCEA), can also supplement the stories.
2.7.2 Conventions of a News Website
Take a good look at the screenshot from a news website below. What do you find? * The layout of a newspaper website differs prominently from its print version. * The elements like byline, lead story, headline, images, caption, pull quotes, attributions, etc., are found in the newspaper's online version, similar to its print version. * The convention differs in the way the news stories are placed. * The layout is either a grid or a multi-column system9. This provides better legibility and a visual cue for seriousness. * Like the print version, the online versions use black fonts on a white background. Colours can be used in headlines, section names10, action buttons, or areas that need immediate attention. * Vertical skyscraper ads are another convention as they stay in sight for longer when scrolling down the page.

Mobile Transition Activity - 6 Analyse a news website and answer the following: What is hypertextuality used for in a news story? What multimedia tools can you find embedded in a news story? What are the options available to facilitate interactivity? How is the layout of the website different from its print version? Read a news story on a news website and try to rewrite it for
1. Newspaper
2. Radio
Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Describe the codes and conventions of print media?

2. What are the unique features of a news website?

2.8 LET US SUM UP
The communication process uses agreed codes and conventions, which also apply to news genres. These codes and conventions of the news genre are affected by the medium in which they are placed. So, an understanding of the medium helps you create news stories that are easy to understand without compromising professional guidelines. Knowledge of medium-specific codes and conventions helps you find meaning in and through the media texts. Knowing how a message is constructed and presented in the news genre can assist in analysing news and information well. Technical and written codes vary according to the medium and are connoted as symbolic. For traditional news media, the codes were either audio or visual and structured according to the convention to facilitate better presentation and comprehension of information.

Online news websites use multimedia tools to combine all the existing news The Medium and
the Message: Print
codes and conventions with interactivity and hypertextuality to present and
and Broadcast
deliver news more immediately and effectively. News We hope this discussion will enable you to explore various news media platforms and analyse how messages are constructed and presented. Eventually, it will enable you to interpret explicit and implicit narratives.
2.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Andersen, N. (2016). Curriculum Contexts. How Might Context
Influence or Inflect Media Literacy Education?. The Journal of Media Literacy, 63(1-2), 60-69.2. Bruhn, J., & Schirrmacher, B. (2022). Intermedial studies: An
introduction to meaning across media (p. 354). Taylor & Francis.
3. Curtin, P. A. (1995). Textual Analysis in Mass Communication Studies:
Theory and Methodology.
4. Frau-Meigs, D. (2019). A curriculum for MIL teaching and learning.
Understanding Media and Information Literacy (MIL) in the Digital
Age: A Question of Democracy. Edited by Ulla Carlsson. UNESCO.
5. Fedorov, A. (2015). Hermeneutic Analysis of the Cultural Context of the
Functioning of Media in Society and Media Texts on Media Literacy
Education Classes. Journal of International Network Center for
Fundamental and Applied Research, (4), 214-225.6. Hartley, J. (2013). Understanding news. Routledge.
7. Homer, E., & Scarratt, E. (2012). Media Studies GCSE (1): possibilities
and practice: Elaine Homer and Elaine Scarratt. In The Media Teacher's Handbook. Routledge.
8. Lacey, N. (2018). Image and representation: Key concepts in media
studies. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Useful Links
http://culturca.narod.ru/radio.htm https://www.thenewsmanual.net/Manuals%20Volume%202/volume2_49.htm https://www.siue.edu/MASSCOMM/PDFs/radio_news_script.pdf http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/static/audio_video/programmes/radio_newsr oom/transcripts/ 18_00hrs.stm#1 https://medium.com/the-book-mechanic/news-articles-vs-feature-articles- why-you-need-to- know-the-difference-dd758fdcc6be
2.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Radio news formats encompass a spectrum of styles tailored to diverse
audience preferences. Straight newscasts adhere to a conventional

Mobile Transition structure, delivering factual updates efficiently. Feature stories provide in-depth analysis through interviews and investigative reporting. News magazines blend news, features, and commentary, offering a comprehensive overview. Talk shows foster audience engagement, enabling interactive discussions on current events. Each format serves distinct purposes, catering to the dynamic needs of listeners.
2. In radio news, the avoidance of clauses is prudent due to the medium's
auditory nature. Clauses can hinder comprehension, leading to confusion or missed information for listeners. By utilising concise, straightforward sentences, clarity is heightened, facilitating better understanding among the audience. Additionally, such a style maintains engagement, as it ensures information is conveyed swiftly and effectively, enhancing the overall listening experience. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The codes and conventions of print media encompass various elements
such as layout, typography, headlines, and visuals. Layouts typically follow a grid system for organisation, while typography is chosen for readability and visual appeal. Headlines are often concise and attention- grabbing, guiding readers to key stories. Visuals, including photographs and illustrations, complement written content to enhance understanding and engagement.
2. News websites offer unique features compared to traditional print media.
They provide real-time updates, multimedia content like videos and interactive graphics, and hyperlinks for further exploration. Additionally, news websites often allow user engagement through comments sections and social media sharing, fostering a sense of community and interactivity among readers. These platforms prioritise immediacy and accessibility, catering to the fast-paced nature of digital information consumption.

From Traditional
UNIT 3 FROM TRADITIONAL MEDIA TO
Media to Digital
Media
DIGITAL MEDIA
Technologies Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 Traditional Media Technologies
3.2.1 Transmission of News, Information and Knowledge
3.2.2 The Movable Printing Press
3.2.3 The Emergence of the Press
3.2.4 New-Printing Technology
3.3 The Role of Literacy
3.4 The Emergence of Technological Elite
3.5 The Emergence of the Middle Class
3.6 The Emergence of Telegraph, Radio and Television
3.7 The Emergence of Digital Media
3.7.1 The Impact of Digital Media
3.7.2 Convergence in Digital Media: Multimedia
3.7.3 Content Management System (SMS)
3.7.4 Search Engine Optimisations (SEO)
3.7.5 Users as Creator
3.7.6 News Gathering in Digital Space
3.7.7 Use of Social Media
3.7.8 Gate-Keeping in the Digital Space
3.7.9 Analytical Profiling of Users
3.7.10 Mobile Telephony
3.8 Let Us Sum Up
3.9 Keywords
3.10 Further Readings
3.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
Technologies have played an incremental role in perpetuating and sustaining civilisations and societies. Their roles have been so defining that the technologies they used or the type of technologies prevalent in those societies became their defining features. You must have heard about the industrial society that formed during the Industrial Revolution in Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. It was followed by knowledge and digital societies in which network computers, the Internet, the World Wide Web, and mobile telephony assumed greater dominance. When we define human evolution as historical and prehistoric, the demarcation is notably based on the ability,

Mobile Transition skill, and technologies of writing and historical record keeping. In communication and mass media, technologies have played equally defining roles. In every era, it adopted the prevalent technologies to reach mass audiences. The earliest cave paintings at Sulawesi in Indonesia, Spain and France are the earliest examples of human desire to reach out to fellow beings and communicate their ideas and perceptions through pictorial depictions. However, the growth and development of media technologies have never been a linear and monolithic progression. There were many twists and turns regarding who owned the technology, how they used it, and who their earlier adopters were. With it also came the hierarchical and patriarchal society in which new technologies were invariably owned by the elites who could profit from them. At times, technologies were also used to exploit the marginalised people. Media technologies soon became an instrument of authoritarianism to control and shape the ideologies of the masses. These are some of the critical thoughts that you as a learner need to keep in mind while transitioning from one media technology to another, and you should look for other factors similar to the process. The two media spaces--traditional and new media--are not mutually exclusive. They do not have separate ecosystems. They share many commonalities and overlap their features. While competing with each other, the two media spaces also complement each other. During the initial stages of development, they lived in a symbiotic relationship, helping each other grow and prosper. While new technology always takes away a part of the business of the earlier technologies, it also creates its own space and captive audience. For example, when TV came, it was thought to wipe out the print media. But as history shows, it didn't happen as feared. A similar doomsday prediction was propagated with the onslaught of digital media against the print. As we know, print media continues despite 20 years of continuous onslaught from the digital space. That's not to say that print media has not been affected. The new media has minimised the profitability of print and has also challenged its dominance in the advertising space.
3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Explain the development of media spaces and issues associated with it; * Describe the differences between traditional and new media; * The main features of the two media spaces; and * The convergence of print and digital media and its impact.
3.2 TRADITIONAL MEDIA TECHNOLOGIES
Technologies have existed for millennia, and it isn't easy to differentiate the onset and cut-off dates of various technologies that have impacted human

civilisation. But broadly speaking, they are divided based on analogue and From Traditional
Media to Digital
digital differentiation. In this sense, newspapers, magazines, radio, and TV Media were initially analogue mediums powered by mechanical and electrical Technologies production. The onset of digital technologies based on binary code came quite late and was responsible for transforming the analogue medium. In ancient times, papyrus was a popular medium of writing in the Nile region of Egypt as early as 3000 BCE, and it continued until the late 12th century CE. It was a reed plant, which provided a smooth and durable material for writing. The word paper is derived from papyrus. The earliest form of book, Codex, was hand-written on papyrus or parchment and fastened together for future use. In India, Betula utilis (Himalayan Birch), popularly called birch bark, was a popular writing material, and the earliest Buddhist and Sanskrit religious texts were written on it. It continues to be used in some parts of India and Nepal to write sacred religious texts among the orthodox sects. These writings were meant to transmit knowledge from one generation to another. But it was confined to a limited group of people who could read and write, especially the priestly and the ruling class. While much is known about the writing material in the ancient period, there is not much historical and archaeological evidence to suggest the transmission of information from one part of the country to another. The Greeks and the Romans used public places and squares to announce the events and ceremonies. Likewise, during the Mauryan period, Ashoka's edicts were popular means of addressing and communicating with the masses. This was probably the earliest means of mass media in India. In addition to this, the Mauryans also made use of the pigeon postal system as a means of connection with far-flung provinces. During the Mughal period, the Waqia- Navis worked as intelligence news gatherers. Mir Bakhshi presented the information received from them to the Emperor. There was yet another group of verbal news-gathering, which Harkarah did.
3.2.1 Transmission of News and Information and Knowledge
Mass media content has three ingredients: news, information, and knowledge. Interestingly, people were more desirous of knowledge than news and information in ancient times. It led to the compilation of sacred and secular books, whether it was on papyrus or birch barks. However, only some people could read and had access to these books and manuscripts. In modern times, news and information have assumed centrality in people's lives largely because of the globalisation of business and finances, which are directly linked to people's livelihoods. As literacy spread, more books were written and sold across the countries. These books were written manually by scribers and kept in safe custody. Knowledge production and transmission were limited and confined mainly to aristocratic and religious elite groups. News was also transmitted through messengers who could travel long distances quickly. Some ancient and mediaeval empires had built a strong network of news carriers who could relay information from one part of the country to another. By this time, the paper was already in use as writing material. Some business communities, like Armenians, had built a robust and

Mobile Transition reliable network of news transmission, which they used in their trans-oceanic trade, especially in the Indian subcontinent. When the Portuguese and the British came to India, they had to get help from Armenian traders to make inroads into the hinterland.
3.2.2 The Movable Printing Press
The papermaking technology was known to China in ancient times. Archaeological evidence of the earliest extant paper dates back to the 1st and 2nd BCE. Gradually, papermaking technology travelled to the Arab world during the 8th century and to Europe in the 11th century. Before the advent of paper in Europe, wooden logs and animal skin parchment were used for writing. The writing was done mainly by hand, and it took months to finish one book. The advent of movable printing presses invented by Johannes Gutenberg in Germany in the 15th century revolutionised printing technology, whereby large numbers of books were produced quickly. The first book to be printed was the Bible. As new technology most often faced hostility from the conservative forces, the early printers were quite apprehensive of its acceptance, especially when the letter was printed in black, associated with evil forces during the mediaeval period. To overcome these superstitious beliefs, the printers found an ingenious way in the Bible, which was welcomed and accepted by the masses and the Church. The new printing technology played an important role in the European Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation, making books easily available to the masses. It also helped to emerge a literate middle class, which would play a significant role in the future. The printing technology was further improved and accelerated by another German printer, Friedrich Koenig, in 1910 when he used a steam engine to speed up the mass production of books. It was the beginning of the industrialisation of printing technology. Earlier, it took one hour to produce 480 pages, which was doubled with a steam engine. The printing process was further improved, with 3,000 pages per hour by the 1930s. By then, the Industrial Revolution had already begun in England, France and other parts of Europe, with people having disposable income.
3.2.3 The Emergence of the Press
The mass production of books and other reading material slowly transformed society with new ideas, values and human business activities. Soon, the sacred and secular knowledge was within everyone's reach. The printing press was a new symbol of the Renaissance, and it mushroomed in every lane and street of the major cities of Europe. It could be compared with the STD booths of the 1990s, cyber cafes and mobile shops of the 21st century, which became a new symbol of connectivity and transmission of information. Newspapers, often called broadsheets, were slowly emerging from various parts of Europe. They were 29.5 by 23.5 inches in contrast to the tabloid, 17 by 11 inches. They were printed, dated and came out in regular internals and were either daily or weekly, depending on their periodicity. Before printing came into vogue, hand-written newspapers were circulated in Venice around the 1560s. They mainly covered stories related to politics and wars in Europe

and elsewhere. Popularly called Avvisi or Gazettes, they were weekly From Traditional
Media to Digital
newspapers. Media Technologies The first mass media in the form of printed newspapers came up only in the early 17th century. Printed by a German named Johann Carolus in Strasbourg, the weekly was called Relation aller Furnemmen und gedenckwurdigen Historien. The first English-language newspaper came out in 1620. It was published in Italy and Germany and was called Corrant. Most early newspapers were censored and allowed to carry only foreign news lest they threaten local administration and Imperial authority. In 1695, the British government relaxed the censorship, and as a result, several newspapers flourished in London, Boston and Philadelphia. Unlike today's anti- plagiarism rules, there was close coordination between newspapers, often reprinting articles freely. In the meantime, transferring print technology from the developed economy to the underdeveloped economy took time and effort. However, the time gap in technology transfer decreased as we moved from the earlier centuries to the present century. The modern newspaper took almost 200 years to reach India after it was first published in Europe. However, the transfer of technology related to radio and TV to India was quick and prompt. In digital media, technology transfer is much quicker. It resulted from globalisation and the interlinking of finances and interdependence between the countries in the late 20th and early parts of the 21st centuries. In India, the plan to launch an English newspaper was afoot as early as 1766 by William Bolts, a Dutch adventurer. But East India Company soon deported him because of his hostilities against the British officials. Later, in January 1780, James Augustus Hicky published the first English newspaper, The Bengal Gazette, from Calcutta. The newspaper was critical of the British administration and accused them and the then Governor General Warren Hastings of corruption and malpractices. The Governor General, in retaliation, prohibited the circulation of the newspaper through the postal system, thus forcing Hickey to come to a compromise. He soon became a supporter of the East India Company government. The 19th century saw the emergence of various regional and English-language newspapers, including The Statesman, The Times of India, the Hindu, and The Tribune from various parts of the country.
3.2.4 New-Printing Technologies
As mentioned earlier, German printer Friedrich Koenig used a steam engine to speed up the mass production of printed material. With it began the process of industrialisation of printing technology. In the 20th century, the inventions of typesetting machines and new rotary presses further accelerated the process of mass production by 1912, when there were some 4000 newspapers in Britain alone. The electrically powered printing machine and the introduction of digital technology in typesetting and printing made it possible for thousands of copies to be published in an hour. This considerably reduced the cost of the newspapers, which helped it further increase its circulation. These early newspapers carried only local news. The national

Mobile Transition media in various countries were yet to emerge. The development of railways and other means of transport helped the circulation and emergence of national media. In the meantime, Britain witnessed the emergence of new journalism during the 1890s, which steered away from elitist features and catered to the masses. William Thomas Stead took cudgels against the prevailing norms and began investigative journalism to probe child welfare and reformation activities. Establishing 'government by journalism' and influencing public opinion and government policies was important. In the meantime, the newspaper industry began introducing new elements in its production process, such as illustrations and pictures. It created visual appeal and attracted new readership to its fold. The technology to incorporate photographs in the print began in the late 19th century, transforming the visual appeal of newspapers. It was Matthew Brady who, in 1962, exhibited the photographs of the Battle of Antietam during the US Civil War. It portrayed the dead and wounded soldiers of the war. It shocked the Americans to see the stark reality. Brady brought "home to us the terrible reality of war," noted the New York Times. As newspapers assumed the role of mass media with greater reach and increasing readership, advertising soon became an integral feature and backbone of revenue. Political parties, too, began lobbying with newspapers for support and reaching out to voters in their respective constituent assemblies. Their hobnobbing with newspapers was responsible for division on an ideological basis and played a deciding role in the emergence of mass media. Also, according to media theorist Benedict Anderson, newspapers were the main instruments in spreading nationalism and forging national identity among people of diverse ethnic groups inhabiting a common geographical area. In India, the newspaper was responsible for bringing freedom fighters from various parts of the country together and fighting for a common cause. As these newspapers expanded their reach and operations and assumed a central role in national politics, they set up networks of bureaus across the country to collect news and generate content for their newspapers. However, as smaller newspapers could not afford the cost of employing a large staff, they mainly relied on news agencies for news. News agencies are mostly privately owned commercial enterprises that provide news on a subscription basis. The newspapers have to pay a monthly/annual fee for the services. Some news agencies formed during the period included Havas in 1859 in France (now called Agence France-Presse. AFP), the Associated Press in the US and Reuters in the UK. These agencies had transnational presence and operations. The Press, however, was not without its challenges. The emergence of penny papers in the 1830s in the US posed serious threats to daily newspapers, as they were one-sixth of the daily price. While the cost was one factor, it appealed to a larger audience because of its popular and sensational news. In some countries, political changes had a detrimental effect on the growth of

the press as it curtailed freedom of expression. In Nazi Germany, some 1000 From Traditional
Media to Digital
newspapers were shut down between 1933-1945. Joseph Goebbels, who was Media in control of the Press, maintained a strict vigil on the Press and issued Technologies directives for its operation, which directly infringed on their freedom.
3.3 THE ROLE OF LITERACY
As discussed, one of the impediments to the growth of early print media was the low literacy rate. However, with a subsequent increase in literacy, the print media began proliferating from the beginning of the 19th century. In England, the concept of Sunday schools run by churches and voluntary and private schools played an important role. According to one estimate, 40 per cent of males and 60 per cent of females were illiterate in 1800. Illiteracy decreased to 33 per cent of males and 50 per cent of females by 1840; by 1870, it dropped to 20 per cent of men and 25 per cent of women. In India, a British colony then, the literacy rate was as low as 3.2 per cent in 1872, which rose to 16 per cent in 1941. However, the dependency on literacy for media consumption has declined in recent years with the emergence of television, radio and the Internet, which do not need literacy. The audio and video elements have made disseminating news and information easily understandable, even without the ability to read and write. A steady rise in the circulation of newspapers and magazines before the coming of the Internet was a testimony to increasing global literacy.
3.4 THE EMERGENCE OF TECHNOLOGICAL
ELITES
New technologies create economic opportunities for entrepreneurs and the early adopters. The same was true with print technology, which benefitted many people. They gradually accumulated wealth, which was disposable for further investment in technological improvement. The media owners soon became part of a larger capitalist group and worked with them to safeguard their interests. They were part of a select group of media barons who continued to dominate the media space for almost two centuries before the coming of the Internet. They also worked in close coordination with political elites and played a vital role in deciding the political destinies of the countries. Interestingly, the trajectory of media evolution and technology in the 21st century has followed a similar path with the emergence of digital media, especially social media, which is concentrated in the hands of a few powerful elites. Only a handful of corporations control the larger media space, whether it is Facebook, YouTube, Twitter or Instagram. This was quite unlike the traditional print media, known for providing local news and catering to geographically bounded audiences. There was diversified ownership of small and medium newspapers, which have now lost their presence in the largely globalised media space, thus leading to monopolistic practices. It is said that the new class of technological elites, with deep pockets have cannibalised the

Mobile Transition smaller and medium media products that formed the backbone of traditional media.
3.5 THE EMERGENCE OF THE MIDDLE CLASS
One of the reasons for the popularity of print media in Europe and elsewhere was the emergence of the middle class in the 18th and 19th centuries. They were a group of people with disposable income and were part of the new workforce of the industrialised economies. They invested in educating their children in private schools and were acutely aware of the change in politics and society. They aped the mannerisms of the elites and were socially upward mobile. Many were traders, merchants, and professionals working in the metropolitan areas. Their appetite for news, information and gossip was vigorous, and they consumed media content voraciously. Higher literacy at the beginning of the 19th century also played an important role in the dissemination of technological know-how related to new means of media production. Technological innovations travelled seamlessly from one part of Europe to another, with the middle class being its early adopters and carriers. It gave birth to a new class of printer professionals, which included linotype operators and compositors. William Bullock further improved the rotary printing press, which was invented by Richard March Hoe in 1843. Today, the offset printing press uses a lithographic process based on the separation of oil and water, and it uses three cylinders: plate, blanket, and impression. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
Choose the correct answers.
1. Which media technology is called digital technology?
A. Newspapers
B. Radio
C. Television
D. Websites
2. Betula utilise (Himalayan Birch), popularly called birch bark, is
A. A kind of food
B. A writing material
C. A decorative material
D. A medicine
3. Who were Waqia-Navis during the Mughal period?
A. Revenue officials
B. Police constables
C. News reporters

D. Announcers From Traditional
Media to Digital
4. Papermaking was first invented in which country. Media
Technologies
A. India
B. Egypt
C. China
D. Argentina
5. Name the printer who improved upon the first printing press
A. Friedrich Koenig
B. Johannes Gutenberg
C. Thomas Bensley
D. Richard March Hoe
3.6 THE EMERGENCE OF TELEGRAPH,
RADIO AND TELEVISION
While printing through offset presses continued apace, other technological innovations had far-reaching consequences on media production. The invention of pulp papermaking in the 1840s considerably reduced the cost of newsprint. While the cost of print production was reduced, the speed with which news travelled was still slow and dependent on railways, which could travel 55 km/hour during the early period. The invention of the telegraph by Samuel Morse with codes of dots and dashes in 1835 accelerated the news gathering and dissemination process. The news can be transmitted instantaneously over long distances through wired telegraphs. By the 1840s, all major cities were interconnected through a network of telegraph wires, which made the transmission of news easy and instant. The geographical distances lost meaning as news from 50 km to 5000 km could travel simultaneously. There were wired networks which could transmit the information. The telegraph was a precursor to what would follow in the coming centuries. It has continued to be used for a long time, and the last telegraphic message was sent to India in 2013. Wired communication in the 20th century was soon followed by wireless communication, which provided technological support for developing radio, television and broadcast media. It was Guglielmo Marconi who developed the first wireless radio system in 1895. It didn't require much physical apparatus for transmission and was widely used by seamen and defence forces during times of crisis. Radio soon became a popular mass media and was considered more efficient than the telephone in reaching larger audiences. It was also less expensive and was easily accessible. Now, an unlimited number of people can listen to radio programmes while sitting in various geographical locations. In addition to providing news and information, radio soon became a favourite medium for advertisers during the 1920s and in subsequent decades. Advertisers could now reach many captive audiences without the need for

Mobile Transition physical transportation and circulation of advertising materials. Political leaders in the US, like Calvin Coolidge, used it to reach out to mass voters during his pre-election radio speech in 1924. Some 20 million people listened to it. It dramatically impacted listeners as modulation in voice, change in tone, and addition of jingles added pleasing elements to advertising. The visual medium of TV soon followed it in the coming decades. It is popularly believed that the popularity of product advertising led to a spur in mass consumerism that was in no way responsible for triggering the Great Depression of the 1920s. By the 1940s, radio had complete dominance in the media space. However, after World War II, it was soon overtaken by a new technology, television, which added motion pictures and visual elements to its broadcast. In addition to audio news reading, viewers can see real pictures in real time on live TV broadcasts. There was a television boom in the US and other parts of the world, leading to its massive expansion and news-gathering growth. As mentioned earlier, it was controlled by only a handful of media barons who guarded their interests vigilantly. The homogenisation and monopolistic practices of broadcast media were widely criticised as they deprived traditional media owners of investing in profitable media ventures. The deregulation of television in the 1980s and 1990s opened doors for other investors, thus adding more channels to the media space. The spread of cable television made it more accessible and geographically diverse regarding reach and impact. The invention of satellite television and Direct to Home (DTH) telecast, based on digitisation of the medium, further improved the speed and quality of the transmission. As the new mass media technology gained ground, media theorists realised that different mediums were shaping their content uniquely, leveraging the medium's strength and downplaying its weaknesses. This led Marshall McLuhan in 1964 to pronounce the famous line "the medium is the message". The dissemination of news and information was the function of the medium which delivered it. It also shaped the quality of content delivery. From the time of the first printing press to the modern-day World Wide Web, the content of the medium has been transformed in unimaginable ways. Each medium has amplified its unique qualities (USP) in enhancing content delivery, sometimes at the cost of comprehensive and detailed information. For example, TV news coverage is more concerned with Breaking News and flashing sensational crime stories for greater Television Rating Points (TRPs) than covering the news in detail. The emergence of digital media during the last decade of the 20th century and the early 21st century has further reshaped the delivery of media content in its unique fashion.
3.7 THE EMERGENCE OF DIGITAL MEDIA
Technological innovations in media mirror other innovations in various fields. In a way, the media quickly adopted these innovations to suit its purpose. As we discussed, the innovations of telegraph, radio, and television were not initiated by the media itself but by other agencies and individuals to 58 develop faster means of communication, especially for defence and science.

The scientific communities relentlessly attempted to enhance the power of From Traditional
Media to Digital
computation and communication networks. Media Technologies The first such attempt was the invention of the digital programmable 'Difference Engine' and 'Analytical Engine' by Charles Babbage in 1820. It later became known as the computer, which used discrete digits instead of binary digits (bits), as used today. This is why Charles Babbage has been called the father of computers. Ada Lovelace, daughter of English poet Lord Byron, who created the programme for Babbage's prototype computer, is the first computer programmer in the history of computers. In the meantime, advanced computers came into existence that could do complex calculations and work. However, there was no network through which individual computers could be connected to communicate. The scientists of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology developed a programme for computers to communicate with each other. The new technology enabled a message to be broken down into small packages at the source before being reassembled at the receiving end. The communication network between individual computers was enhanced to include multiple computers. The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) in the US further refined the process and made the new technology available to the US military in 1969. They were able to develop multiple communication pathways and ensure that if one route failed to work, the other network (route) could be activated to compensate for the route loss and enable easy information transfer. The ARPANET made the new communication system available for commercial use in 1976. Queen Elizabeth II sent the first email from one computer to another in 1976 by clicking the send button. A tangible and real progress, however, began in 1989 with the invention of the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) by Tim Berners-Lee, which made it possible for users to browse the Internet. A year after the popularity of HTTP, the World Wide Web came into existence and connected the world of computers through optic fibres and telecommunication networks. The Computer-mediated communication system influenced media communication as it demolished the geographical boundaries and physical distribution of newspapers and media products. Now, people in any part of the world can access news and information at the click of a button. It also accelerated the news gathering and dissemination process with less time devoted to the production process. It didn't require a newsprint, printing machine, or staff dedicated to production and circulation, thus reducing the cost of media production considerably. In addition to being an affordable medium, it opened doors for media owners and readers to access and launch new media products, catering to diverse groups.
3.7.1 The Impact of Digital Media
The impact of digital media has been profound and sweeping, affecting all aspects of life, including education, healthcare, banking, commerce and governance. It had a very harmful effect on traditional media as many began

Mobile Transition closing their shop because of high production costs. According to a survey, almost two newspapers are shutting down weekly in the US. One of the reasons has been the loss of advertising revenue, which has now shifted to digital media. Now, advertisers focus more on target advertising for higher returns, which is easily traceable on the digital platform. According to one estimate, the digital advertising market in the US in 2021 was US$155.3 billion and is increasing at a considerable pace. In India, Rs 246 billion was generated from online advertising in 2021. In addition, there has been a shift in the pattern of advertising platforms with the coming of digital media. However, this does not mean that traditional media are not generating advertising revenue; instead, the growth in the segment either stagnates or does not grow on the expected line. Moreover, traditional media's huge operational and production costs have made it unviable, thus reducing the profit margin. On the other hand, the operation cost of digital media is minimal. However, the cost of news-gathering remains the same for both the media.
3.7.2 Convergence of Digital Media: Multimedia
There are obvious benefits of digital media vis-a-vis traditional media that have made the former popular among the trans-generational audience. In addition to being affordable and accessible from anywhere, it does away with the need to carry the media product physically. The user can save the content on his/her laptop, computer or mobile and access it later at their convenience. Unlike traditional media, which is based on a one-way flow of information from source to end-user, digital media provides instant interactivity between the two. The most significant advantage of digital media is its feature of convergence of various technologies, including print, radio and television, all rolled into one. It can carry pictures, infographics, animations, and interactive features. The convergence of these mediums has often been called 3Cs, meaning Communication, Computing and Content. The scope of convergence has been further expanded to include technological, economic and cultural convergence because of the popularity and reach of the medium. The platform providing the converged content of various mediums is called multimedia because of its technological prowess. It may include segregated features like online interactive, podcasts, news feeds, blogging and mob file applications. The diversity of the technology and content is part of the inclusive media experience. While the universalisation of technology and content is a given advantage, the medium has also been accused of robbing the individuality of the various mediums. It has painted the diverse medium in one colour, a mosaic, but taking away the beauty of each.
3.7.3 Content Management System (CMS)
The Content Management System of an online news operation is the backend and the backbone of the digital operation. It works like a central nervous system of the human body, which transmits and processes the messages received from various sense organs. It is a central depository where all the information is received, keyed in, and published before it is visible on the

website and accessed by various media. It is the depository and processing From Traditional
Media to Digital
centre for receiving news, pictures, audio, and video files edited before Media publication and broadcast. There is a wide range of format choices available Technologies for uploading this content. For example, pictures and images are uploaded in jpg, jpeg, and png formats, audio files in MP3, and videos in MP4 format. The latter provides lots of flexibility for coding. One advantage of digital media is that the content, once published, can be re-edited, and new inputs can be added without disturbing its publishing status. This is quite unlike traditional media, where news cannot be edited once published and broadcast.
3.7.4 Search Engine Optimisation (SEO)
Much like the listenership of radio and TRP of TV news channels, there is still competition among digital content providers to get the eyeballs from the readers. Many news content is accessed through search engines, and there is always a race among digital content providers to appear on the search engines. The ability of news or content to appear on search engines depends on various factors. Among them are the relevance and topicality of the content, its uniqueness, the ranking of the news provider and the way it has been programmed to appear in the search engine. While uploading a story, an online editor has to provide searchable keywords, mega tags and descriptive details of the content.
3.7.5 Users as Creators
One of the benefits of digital media is its importance to users in the larger scheme of technological innovation. Unlike traditional media, users can now play a more active role in the form of the creator of news content, posting comments, sharing it and voicing his/her opinions on various issues. The concept of Citizen Reporter has added a new dimension to news-gathering, as it is not possible for reporters to be at all the places. This has also led to the process of democratisation in the news-gathering process. Most citizen reporters work voluntarily, but media organisations also appoint some. However, the authenticity of such news reporting is always questionable, as citizen reporters are not trained professionals. Nonetheless, they sometimes inform the media of a particular event or corruption, to which professional reporters carry a follow-up.
3.7.6 News Gathering in Digital Space
As a result of the proliferation of media space and types of content created by diverse mediums, the role of news reporters has diversified. A news reporter works on different media platforms at the same time by creating visuals (photographs), podcasts, videos and social media content. Most media organisations have a robust online presence, so their content is used in news multimedia production. The social media presence of reporters often adds credibility to media organisations as they provide ground report feeds in social media. Some enterprising reporters have assumed the role of independent media production of their popularity. Equipped with a camera, digital mike and a laptop, they provide on-site reporting of the events.

Mobile Transition 3.7.7 Use of Social Media
Recently, social media has assumed greater importance because of its reach and popularity among the masses. As a result, no media house can afford to miss the bandwagon, and they maintain an across-media presence in social networking sites, bookmarking, social news, media sharing, microblogging, and online forum sites. Some social networking sites like Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and Instagram have huge followings, making them ideal platforms for news dissemination. These digital platforms are also popular among political leaders, sportspersons, celebrities, and business barons, who often voice their opinions. These social networking sites are also where politicians and leaders announce their plans and policies and interact with the masses for feedback. Incidentally, these sites have become the source of news and information for journalists and media organisations.
3.7.8 Gate-Keeping in the Digital Space
Credibility is one of the important factors that make or mars the reputation of a media product. To ensure that news is reliable and authentic, it goes through various levels of check, counter-check and re-check before it is published or broadcast. A well-defined mechanism exists for trained editorial professionals to discard false, unauthenticated, and propaganda news items. The reputation of a media organisation largely depends on the strength of its gatekeeping. However, in the digital age, the process of gatekeeping has been liquidated because of the maddening rush to be the first to give breaking news. Also, it puts an additional cost on media organisations to have several fact-checkers during 24/7 operations. There needs to be more trained human resources to do the job. However, some traditional media organisations have retained their vigour in fact-checking and have been vigilant enough to maintain editorial sanctity.
3.7.9 Analytical Profiling of Users
The digital media, based on computational analytics, provides rare insight into the profile of its readers on a real-time basis. This is quite different from the traditional media, which focuses on the circulation of newspapers and magazines. Apart from circulation figures, little information is available on the age, gender, and social profile of the people reading the newspaper. Other mediums like radio and television measure their popularity based on the number of listeners and TRP. Digital media, on the other hand, provides a detailed account of the number of people reading the news, their age group, gender, geographical location, and the time spent on a particular site. It provides a deeper insight into the kind of content liked and read by the users and their content choices. These data are quite useful for the news providers in reshaping the content provided to the readers.
3.7.10 Mobile Telephony
Mobile telephony provides one of the best examples of technological convergence among all technologies. It is not simply a device but a

combination of devices like a telephone, a typewriter, a camera, a calculator, From Traditional
Media to Digital
a computer, a clock, a torch, a mirror, gaming, a navigational guide and many Media more, all combined in one. It is a complete world for news-gathering and Technologies dissemination and communication devices. Mobile telephony has brought a sea change to the way information is shared and consumed. It provides instant connectivity with any part of the world, thus shrinking the world into a global village. In 2021, over 15 million mobile devices were worldwide, providing easy access to news and information. It has opened a new vista of news consumption, cutting across class, caste, gender and social division, thus empowering the weak and marginalised equally. The pace of growth in media technology has been so fast that it has become almost impossible to predict the future. It has made the access and reach of news, information and knowledge unimaginably easy from the days of traditional media, and its growth is expected to accelerate in times to come. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
Choose the correct answers.
1. Corrant was a popular
A. Newspaper
B. A radio programme
C. Communication device
D. Newspaper
2. Guglielmo Marconi is the inventor of
A. Wireless radio
B. Television
C. Printing machine
D. Communication programme
3. Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP), invented by Tim Berners-Lee, is
used in which of the following mediums
A. Newspapers
B. Radio
C. Television
D. Internet
4. Which format is used for uploading videos on a news website?
A. MP4 format
B. MP3 format
C. JPG
D. JPEG

Mobile Transition 5. What mass media was used by Ashoka, the Mauryan king, to communicate with people?
A. Public announcement
B. Folk songs
C. Rock edicts
D. Pamphlets
3.8 LET US SUM UP
We learnt that every technology has its use in its own time and space. Some of the technologies have had a transforming impact on human civilisation. It played a critical role in disseminating news, information and knowledge - the bedrock of human progress. As media is one of the constituents of learning, education, and governance, the associated technologies helped it progress. From the age of traditional media to the new digital age, it has strived to compete with allied fields in providing fast, efficient and authentic news. The various technologies also shaped the content provided to users uniquely. The digital age has broadened the canvass of information, making it easily available to the masses. It's no wonder that the age we are living in has been a knowledge society as it forms the basis of existence.
3.9 KEYWORDS
Papyrus: Derived from plant barks, it was a popular writing medium in the Nile region of Egypt in ancient times (as early as 3000 BCE). Waqia-Navis: They were professional news reporters during the Mughal period and provided intelligence reports to the emperor through Mir Bakhshi. News agencies are mostly privately owned commercial enterprises that provide news on a subscription basis. Newspapers pay a monthly/annual fee for the services.
ARPANET: The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network
(ARPANET) is a US-based agency that developed networks for computers to communicate with each other.
HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP): Developed by Tim Berners-Lee,
HTTP is a communication protocol that connects web servers and allows users to browse the Internet.
3.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the
Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso
2. Bradshaw, Paul. 2017. The Online Journalism Handbook: Skills to
Survive and Thrive in the Digital Age. London: Routledge
3. Briggs, Asa and Peter Burke. 2005. A Social History of the Media: From
Gutenberg to the Internet. Malden, MA: Polity Press

4. Croteau and Hoynes. 2003. Media Society: Industries, Images and From Traditional
Media to Digital
Audiences (third edition). Pine Forge Press: Thousand Oakes Media Technologies
5. Flew and Humphreys. 2005. "Games: Technology, Industry, Culture" in
Terry Flew, New Media: an Introduction (second edition). South
Melbourne: Oxford University Press
6. Holmes. 2005. "Telecommunity" in Communication Theory: Media,
Technology and Society. Cambridge: Polity
7. John. Herbert. 1999. Journalism in the Digital Age: Theory and practise
for broadcast, print and online media. MA: Focal Press
8. Lev, Manovich. 2001. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, USA:
MIT Press
9. McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding Media: The Extensions of
Man. New York: McGraw-Hill
10. Mintz, Steven "The Jazz Age: The American 1920s: The Formation of
Modern American Mass Culture," Digital History, 2007,
http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/database/article_display.cfm?hhid=454.11. Newman, W. Russell. 2010. Media, Technology and Society: Theories of
Media Evolution. Michigan, US: The University of Michigan Press
12. Noll, Michael A. 2007. The Evolution of Media. Maryland, USA:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers
3.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. D
2. B
3. C
4. C
5. A
Check Your Progress: 2
1. A
2. A
3. D
4. A
5. C

M obile Transition
UNIT 4 USES OF NEW MEDIA
TECHNOLOGIES IN SOCIETY
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Understanding New Media and Media Convergence
4.2.1 Characteristics of New Media Technologies
4.2.2 Change in Media Infrastructural Dynamics
4.3 Transitioning Society with New Media
4.3.1 Shift in Social and Cultural Practices
4.3.2 Digital Democratic Processes: ICTs, e-Governance, and New Concepts
4.4 Dimensions of New Media Literacy
4.4.1 Digital Devices, Access, and Empowerment
4.4.2 Understanding the Potential of New Media Technologies
4.4.3 Developing New Media Skills and Competencies
4.5 User-Centric Participation via New Media Technologies
4.5.1 Participatory Culture and New Media Literacy Framework
4.5.2 Active Audience Approach and User-Generated Content
4.5.3 Civic Engagement and Participatory Politics
4.5.4 Digital Activism and New Media for Social Action
4.6 Let Us Sum Up
4.7 Further Readings
4.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
The materialisation of digital media has created a dual identity of media logic, prior to which media generally consisted of print and the audio-visual medium. The legacy of media as a singular entity has disintegrated and re- integrated through cultural, economic and political processes to pave the way for digital media. Therefore, the fulcrum of traditional and new media is loosely edged on production, consumption and outlet patterns. Media as an institution has become a space of converging and diverging spaces with overlapping characteristics of traditional media and new media due to the collapse of space and time and a mode of production. In the news arena, newspapers and magazines, television news channels, and online news platforms have enriched news debates and consumption patterns, evident across all stances of life and society. This media convergence has transformed the infrastructure and content produced in the present compared to before Web 2.0 technologies. These new media technologies have brought about societal changes at the 66 social, cultural, political, and economic levels. Most importantly, the

audiences have also changed considerably, from users to produsers and from Uses New Media
Technologies for
consumers to prosumers, thereby blurring the lines between producers and Society users. This unit attempts to focus on how these new media technologies have transformed and influenced the social, cultural and democratic practices of the new media audiences.
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Understand the concept of new media and media convergence; * Grasp the characteristics of new media technologies and how it has transformed the media infrastructure; * Analyse the shift in cultural, social and political practices due to new media; * Evaluate the three pillars of new media literacy and its efficacy in society; and * Assess the opportunities for participation due to new media technologies at the sociological and political levels.
4.2 UNDERSTANDING NEW MEDIA AND MEDIA
CONVERGENCE
The concept of digital media arises from the characteristic that all information or data in these media is encoded in numbers, the most common being that of binary code of 0 and 1. Thus, technology is the defining dimension of the media, which observes the shift of storing information digitally on a physical object, such as a USB flash drive, digital images, MP3, etc. The ambiguous nature of new media as a term, which primarily leans on subjectivity, and the restricted perception of online media, which focuses on internet-based media only, leads us to focus on digital media for this unit in convergence with the facet of online media since the Internet has enhanced the digital sphere. Media convergence deals with the interconnectedness of communication technologies, computer networks and media content. Therefore, it brings the "three C's" together: computing, communication and content. The notion of new media convergence can be better reflected from three dimensions, all of which have influenced the social, cultural, economic and political spheres of life while changing the democratic processes. The first form of convergence to consider is technological convergence. Technological convergence is the movement of almost all media and information to digital electronic formats, storage, and transfer of the digitisation of all media, communications, texts, sound, images, and even currency into a common digital format or language. This process has involved a switch from analogue media to digital forms. Due to technological convergence, governments and policymakers have initiated the need to change legislation to govern this new form of industry.

Mobile Transition This led to a second kind of convergence, called regulatory convergence, a deregulatory strategy in the media and telecommunication industries adopted by the governments of many industrial economies since the mid-1990s. This set of regulatory changes has profoundly affected the structure of the media, telecom and computing industries and significantly impacted our current media culture. After the transformation of the regulatory framework, mergers and acquisitions across the media industry were witnessed at a large scale, driven by the combination of technological developments and the overall climate of neo-liberal deregulation and globalisation. Dominance of media conglomerates with expansive scale of mergers and acquisitions paved the way for large-scale cross-industry expansion or horizontal integration, in which a firm in one industry (for instance, telecommunications) expanded across to another industry (such as television broadcasting) and vertical integration, in which a firm that is concentrated on one point in the production chain of a sector (for instance, film production) expands into another part of the production chain in the same industry, such as film distribution. These types of expansion drove a general strategy of industrial convergence within the media and telecom sector, the third kind of convergence that occurred and changed the media landscape.
4.2.1 Characteristics of New Media Technologies
Due to the advent of new media technologies and convergent media, the novelty can be experienced in the form of:
1. New textual experiences (new kinds of genres and textual forms,
entertainment and pleasure and patterns of media consumption; computer games, simulations, special effects cinema)
2. New ways of representing the world (new representational possibilities
and experiences, immersive virtual environments, screen-based multimedia)
3. New relationship between subjects (users and consumers) and media
technologies (use and reception of image and communication media in everyday life and meanings invested in media technologies)
4. New experiences of the relationship between embodiment, identity and
community (shift in personal and social experience of time, space and pace)
5. New conceptions of the biological body's relationship to technological
media (challenges to the received distinction between the human and the artificial, nature and technology, body and media as technological prostheses, the real and virtual)
6. New patterns of organisation and production (realignments and
integrations in media culture, industry, economy, access, ownership, control and regulation)

4.2.2 Change in Media Infrastructural Dynamics Uses New Media
Technologies for
Society Multiple media can be understood as using different tools such as television, tape recorder, video, overhead projectors, slide projectors, etc. Multimedia is denoted as a short form for multiple media. Enhanced levels of interactivity are made possible by combining multiple forms of media content. Online multimedia is increasingly becoming object- oriented and data-driven, enabling applications with collaborative end-user innovation and personalisation on multiple forms of content over time. Examples of these range from multiple forms of content on Websites like photo galleries with both images (pictures) and title (text) user-updated to simulations whose coefficients, events, illustrations, animations or videos are modifiable, allowing the multimedia "experience" to be altered without reprogramming. In addition to seeing and hearing, haptic technology enables virtual objects to be felt. Emerging technology involving illusions of taste and smell may also enhance the multimedia experience. The tangent of multiple media can be witnessed from two major strands: multiplicity of devices and media platforms. From the device's perspective, the multiplicity factor can be witnessed through the overlapping features of a Bluetooth music player and an Amazon Echo. However, they also have distinctive features which neither of them can cover. Digital media has enabled an individual to possess multiple devices, such as laptops, mobile phones, tablets, streaming devices, music players, etc., that pertain to various facets of life. Moreover, seamless connectivity has also been made possible due to the Internet and the Internet of Things (IoT). Augmented Reality headsets can be combined with that of gaming, giving rise to virtual gaming. Therefore, emancipatory mechanisms are available in the context of devices. Similarly, online media has made multiple media platforms accessible to every individual based on user selectivity and narrowcasting possible for all needs: communicative, educative, commercial and entertainment. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is media convergence?

2. What are the three dimensions of media convergence?

Mobile Transition 3. What are the characteristics of new media technologies?

4.3 TRANSITIONING SOCIETY WITH NEW
MEDIA
New media technologies have influenced the social and cultural practices and the democratic and economic processes of society. In this unit section, we will learn about the shift in practices across different aspects of society.
4.3.1 Shift in Social and Cultural Practices
Individuals now use new media technologies such as smartphones to stay connected with their families and friends via various modes of communication. Additionally, users' everyday lives have transformed considerably with newer forms of gaining education, working and maintaining relationships apart from online shopping and managing finances.
1. New Ways of Living
The speed, convenience, and versatility of social messaging have led to its integration within the entire customer journey, and it is even greater than traditional methods like emails, phone calls, or live chats. WhatsApp and other similar social messaging apps have allowed people to share texts, videos, photos, and other content. Even though these apps are called IP messaging apps, these have primarily become 'Social Networks'. The forerunners in the arena of IP messaging are WhatsApp,
Viber, Google Duo, Hike, Skype, Facebook Messenger, VChat,
Instagram Messenger, Snapchat, Telegram, etc., wherein WhatsApp takes the lead across the country. In addition, these IP messaging platforms allow users to place a video or voice call (also known as VOIP), thereby changing the dynamics of the telecom sector in India and across the globe. Emojis, GIFs, emojis, and stickers have become quite prevalent, especially amongst the younger audience. In contrast, sharing images, videos, documents, and locations has garnered worldwide attention as well. Furthermore, social networking sites such as Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, Snapchat, etc., have grown multifold, initiating new ways of staying connected with friends and family. Moreover, with the emergence of social networking sites, matrimonial sites, dating sites, edTech, etc., a new world of online relationships, internet dating, online education, and online work modes has also emerged, shaping our current cultural and social practices. Online shopping has also been enabled due to the emergence of e- commerce websites and digital finance practices, thereby transforming

the everyday lives of society, including consumers and producers. Uses New Media
Technologies for
Furthermore, every aspect of our lives can be found online, which Society provides an alternative to the physical world in all walks of life.
2. Mobile Revolution
Mobile media in the contemporary world is firmly embedded in our lives. Mobile phones have offered us the unique possibility of transcending the confines of space and located-ness, allowing us to communicate with others regardless of where we are. In doing so, they transformed how we understand space and disrupted the boundaries we had placed between private and public space and between working life and social-private life. With the infusion of mobiles, the emerging highly mobile, personalised, atomised, hybrid work-social life has completely changed the dynamics of our way of life socially, culturally, and politically. In the political spectrum, horizontal social networks have developed extensively; however, the scope of democratising political mediation and the pressure of mobile media commercialisation and control are still contested. While in the sociocultural outcomes of the mobile revolution, individual autonomy has enhanced considerably with a renewed sense of creativity and use of imagination due to the influx of several messaging and calling digital platforms, however, the dominance of consumer culture has taken over face-to-face communication.
3. Finance Technology and New Economic Practices
The digital economy intersects with postmodern cultural economies (the media, the university, and the arts) and the information industry (the information and communication complex). The digital economy is recognised as a specific mechanism of internal capture of larger social and cultural knowledge pools. Specific forms of production (Web design, multimedia production, digital service), along with forms of labour we wait to recognise as such (chat, mailing lists, amateur newsletters, and maybe free labour, too), construct the idea of digital labour. The notion of a digital economy has revolutionised the dynamics of the economy and economic practices as well. With the emergence of cyberspace, credit and debit cards have become a norm apart from online transactions, thereby blurring and transcending geographical boundaries and language barriers. The advent of online transactions, wallet apps, UPI, PayPal, etc., has also transformed economic practices in India. In addition, the Digital India programme has further enhanced the scope of India's digital economy. Announcements on Fibre to the Home (FTH) and 5G will only hasten the development of reliable, high-speed telecom infrastructure, the backbone of every digital economy. Apart from the variation in the dynamics of the economy, cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin have materialised. It is a decentralised digital currency without a central bank or single administrator.

Mobile Transition 4.3.2 Digital Democratic Processes: ICTs, e-Governance and
New Concepts
The evolution of digital media is a fascinating backdrop for examining political institutions. New media technologies have become tools for moulding societal structures, evidently shaping interactions between individuals and governments. Research on digital media's impact on democratic systems continues to grow through the metric of press freedom and expression. On the contrary, comparative studies on its effects within authoritarian governments have lagged.
1. e-Governance
e-Governance in India has transformed to promote inclusive growth that covers electronic services, products, devices and job opportunities. An initiative driving this growth is Digital India. The Digital India programme is the government's flagship programme with a vision to transform India into a digitally empowered society and knowledge economy. The aim of this initiative is maximum governance and minimum government. E-Governance emphasises shifting governance and policymaking to the digital platform and using digital tools to bring about change and transformation in the political and democratic processes.
2. Cyber Laws
With the arrival of digital media, policymakers worldwide developed cyber laws for their respective countries, which governed communication technology, particularly cyberspace or the Internet. Cyber laws apply to all users of this space as they have worldwide jurisdiction. Cyber law can also be described as the branch of law that deals with legal issues related to using inter-networked information technology. In most developed countries, cyber laws have been developed stringently to adhere to the norms of privacy and security of its citizens, especially in Western countries. However, in most developing countries, cyber laws are not as well defined and are in the best interests of all stakeholders involved. In India, cyber laws are contained in the Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act), which came into force on October 17, 2000. The Act's main purpose is to provide legal recognition to electronic commerce and facilitate filing electronic records with the Government. A recent amendment of the Act in 2021, which specifically deals with laws about OTT platforms and social media, has been brought under the purview of the existing IT Act in India.
3. Net Neutrality
The concept of net neutrality focuses on the aspect that all data on the Internet should be treated equally by corporations, such as Internet service providers and governments, regardless of content, user, platform,

application or device. Network neutrality requires all Internet service Uses New Media
Technologies for
providers (ISPs) to provide the same level of data access and speed to all Society traffic and that traffic to one service or website cannot be blocked or degraded. ISPs are also not to create special arrangements with services or websites in which companies provide them with improved network access or speed. The term "network neutrality" was introduced in 2002. The concept was floated in response to efforts by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), a United States regulator body, to require broadband providers to share their infrastructure with competing firms. Internationally, countries like the USA, Japan, Brazil, Chile, Norway, etc., have some form of law, order or regulatory framework that affects net neutrality. In the Indian context, the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) adopted net neutrality regulations in July 2018. The regulations highlight that internet access services should be governed by a principle that restricts any form of discrimination or interference in the treatment of content, including practices like blocking, degrading, slowing down, or granting preferential speeds or treatment to any content.
4. Digital Literacy Initiatives
As technology transforms what and how we read and consume information, the notion of digital literacy becomes crucial. The American Library Association (ALA) defines digital literacy as "the ability to use information and communication technologies to find, evaluate, create, and communicate information, requiring both cognitive and technical skills." In this context, digital literacy encompasses more than education because the Internet has become a key source of information. It is imperative to be digitally literate to comprehend what is authentic and reliable information while consuming it. Individuals aware of digital literacy understand the basics of Internet safety, such as creating strong passwords, understanding and using privacy settings, and knowing what or what not to share on social media. While digital literacy has gained prominence globally at an institutional level, India has embraced the National Digital Literacy Mission (NDLM) Programme, not just for students but for all strata of society. The National Digital Literacy Mission Programme is a dynamic and integrated digital literacy awareness, education, and capacity programme platform. It will help rural communities take the lead in the global digital economy, help them maintain competitiveness, and shape a technologically empowered society. The vision of the Digital Literacy Mission (DLM) is to create a multi-stakeholder consortium and work with the government and their various schemes and agendas to showcase in some of those panchayat constituencies how making them digitally literate can change the scenario of governance, empowerment, social inclusion, educational approach and employment.

Mobile Transition 4.4 DIMENSIONS OF NEW MEDIA LITERACY
On the one hand, new media technologies have completely transformed the minute ways in which we live our lives; on the other hand, they have also brought about changes at the macro level, from economy to politics. However, despite the transition of all paradigms of society, it is imperative to understand the critical perspective of digital media to be fully equipped with how digital media can empower individuals and society at large.
4.4.1 Digital Devices, Access and Empowerment
When discussing access to digital devices and new media technologies, we often take a privileged stance and consider it a no-brainer to own devices such as laptops, smartphones, the Internet, etc. However, the concept of access does not limit itself to the upper middle class and high class of society; it also leans towards the economically weaker sections of society along with the marginalised sections. Furthermore, apart from ownership of said devices, the usage and ability to use them also highlight the aspect of access. The primary question that arises when it comes to empowerment via new media technologies in society is if marginalised communities such as persons with disabilities (PWDs), people from remote communities, people belonging to lower socio-economic strata, LGBTQIA communities, etc., have equal opportunities to access ICTs. If not, then the need to find a way to bridge this gap is of utmost relevance, essentially to make society equitable at the basic level of access.
4.4.2 Understanding the Potential of New Media Technologies
The second dimension of new media literacy is the opportunity to understand and fully grasp the impact and reach of these new media technologies in society. This parameter deals with the scope of influence that new media technologies might have on our social, cultural, political and economic lives. This dimension has already been discussed in great detail in the previous sections of this unit. However, a critical analysis of the same is explicitly needed to accept and adapt, first and foremost, to the fact that new media technologies have a major role in society.
4.4.3 Developing New Media Skills and Competencies
Lastly, the third dimension of new media literacy is the participatory function of users in new media technologies to be fully empowered. However, one must have the necessary skill set and competencies. Jenkins et al. (2009) have identified 11 new media literacies comprehensively covering social skills and cultural competencies amongst young people to participate in online media spaces fully. The new media literacies' framework is based on traditional literacy, research, technical, and critical analysis skills taught in the classroom and developed through collaborations and networking. The core media literacy skills are as follows:
1. Play: the capacity to experiment with one's surroundings as a form of
problem-solving

Through play, children and young people try on roles, experiment with Uses New Media
Technologies for
culturally central processes, manipulate core resources, and explore their Society immediate environments. Children can play games and shift their emphasis from fun to engagement and learning, which is also deeply motivating. Educators can tap into play as a skill when they encourage free-form experimentation and open-ended speculation.
2. Simulation: the ability to interpret and construct dynamic models of
real-world processes New media provides powerful new ways of representing and manipulating information. New forms of simulation expand our cognitive capacity, allowing us to deal with larger bodies of information, experiment with more complex configurations of data, form hypotheses quickly and test them against different variables in real time. Contemporary video games allow youth to play with sophisticated simulations and, in the process, to develop an intuitive understanding of how we might use simulations to test our assumptions about the way the world works.
3. Performance: the ability to adopt alternative identities for
improvisation and discovery Gameplay is also one of a range of contemporary forms of youth popular culture that encourages young people to assume fictive identities and, through this process, develop a richer understanding of themselves and their social roles. Educators have used dramatisations to teach children to reflect more deeply on their experiences of stories. One of the most prominent examples is Model United Nations (MUN), which helps young people develop new knowledge and strategies by enabling them to develop alternative identities.
4. Appropriation: the ability to meaningfully sample and remix media
content Appropriation is understood as a process by which students learn by taking culture apart and putting it back together. It may involve both analysis and commentary. Sampling intelligently from the existing cultural reservoir requires a close analysis of this material's existing structures and uses; remixing requires an appreciation of emerging structures and underlying potential meanings. Such appropriation is visible in drama, theatrics, art, and music and can also be acknowledged in gaining insight into educational materials.
5. Multi-tasking: the ability to scan one's environment and shift focus
onto salient details on an ad hoc basis Attention, in order to learn cohesively, is important but difficult for learners nowadays, especially due to the emergence of digital media; however, instead of focusing on narrowing attention, young people often respond to a rich media environment by multi-tasking. Multi-tasking involves monitoring and responding to the sea of information around us. Students need help distinguishing between being off task and handling multiple tasks simultaneously. Currently, young people are playing with

Mobile Transition these skills as they engage in games or social activities that reward the ability to maintain a mental picture of complex sets of relationships and to adjust quickly to shifts in perceptual cues.
6. Distributed Cognition: the ability to interact meaningfully with tools
that expand our mental capacities. Applications of the distributed cognition perspective to education suggest that students must learn the affordances of different tools and information technologies and know which functions tools and technologies excel at and in what contexts they can be trusted. Students need to acquire patterns of thought that regularly cycle through available sources of information as they make sense of developments in the world around them. One of the recent examples is augmented reality (AR), a potential tool for distributed intelligence to be applied in the learning process.
7. Collective Intelligence: the ability to pool knowledge and compare
notes with others towards a common goal Children and adults are acquiring the skills to operate within knowledge communities by interacting with popular culture. We often learn through play that we later apply to more serious tasks. For example, young Pokemon fans, who each know crucial details about the various species, constitute a collective intelligence whose knowledge is extended each time two youths on the playground share something about the franchise. Educators can deploy aspects of collective intelligence when students pool observations and work through interpretations with others studying the same problems at scattered locations. Such knowledge communities can confront problems of greater scale and complexity than any student can handle.
8. Judgement: the ability to evaluate the reliability and credibility of
different information sources The new mediated landscape of mainstream news sources, collaborative blog projects, unsourced news sites, and increasingly sophisticated marketing techniques aimed at ever-younger consumers demand that students distinguish fact from fiction, argument from documentation, real from fake, and marketing from enlightenment. Even when media content has been determined credible, it is vital for students also to identify and analyse the producer's perspective: who is presenting what to whom and why. Media literacy education, therefore, heavily relies on the concept of Judgment to distinguish information from misinformation and disinformation.
9. Transmedia Navigation: the ability to deal with the flow of stories and
information across multiple modalities At the most basic level, transmedia stories are stories told across multiple media. Modern literacy requires the ability to express ideas across various systems of representation and signification, including words (spoken or written), images (still or moving), music, 3D models, etc. Students must learn to sort through various modes of expression,

determine which is most effective in reaching their audience and Uses New Media
Technologies for
communicating their message, and grasp which techniques best convey Society information through this channel.
10. Networking: the ability to search for, synthesise, and disseminate
information In a world in which knowledge production is collective and communication occurs across various media, the capacity to network emerges as a core social skill and cultural competency. Students today tap into popular search systems such as Google.com, Amazon, etc., readily available on Web 2.0, to collect and annotate data for themselves and other users. Therefore, Networking is only partially about identifying potential resources; it also involves a process of synthesis, during which multiple resources are combined to produce new knowledge. Educators use social networking to link learners with others who might share their interests or encourage students to publish works produced for the larger public.
11. Negotiation: the ability to travel across diverse communities,
discerning and respecting multiple perspectives, and grasping and following alternative sets of norms The fluid communication within the new media environment brings together groups who otherwise might have lived segregated lives. Culture flows easily from one community to another. People online encounter conflicting values and assumptions and come to grips with competing claims about the meanings of shared artefacts and experiences. Therefore, it becomes increasingly critical to help students acquire skills in understanding multiple perspectives, respecting and even embracing diversity of views, understanding a variety of social norms, and negotiating between conflicting opinions. Educators can foster negotiation skills when they bring together groups from diverse backgrounds and provide resources and processes that ensure careful listening and deeper communication. Therefore, as highlighted by Jenkins et al. (2009), core media literacy skills combine social skills and cultural competencies in and out of school so that young people can adapt and learn effectively about the dynamic environment through the available tools. Apart from school, parents become another agency that can help shape young people's relationships with online tools for enhancing their mental capacities to be media and information-literate, from communication to effective participation in online media spaces. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the new social and cultural practices adopted by individuals
with the help of new media technologies? 77

2. How have the democratic processes evolved with new media
technologies?

3. What are the social skills and cultural competencies Jenkins et al. (2009)
discussed for empowering themselves?

4.5 USER-CENTRIC PARTICIPATION VIA NEW
MEDIA TECHNOLOGIES
4.5.1 Participatory Culture and New Media Literacy
Framework From a media literacy perspective, Jenkins et al. (2009) initiated the idea of participatory culture among young people in online media. As per Jenkins et al. (2009), young people are consumers and producers in online media spaces. Ito et al. (2009) illustrate that youth participate in online media spaces for two main purposes- friendship-driven and interest-driven. In this context, Ito et al. (2009) identify three sub-genres of participation: hanging out (friendship-driven participation), messing around (acquiring a new skill online) and geeking out (intensive and focused participation after acquiring the skill online; hence, learning). The notion of participatory culture, as per Jenkins et al. (2009), stems from three core gaps:
1. Participation Gap (unequal access to opportunities, experiences, skills
and knowledge)
2. Transparency Problem (difficulty to recognise how media shapes their
perception)
3. Ethics Challenge (ethics to communicate and responsibly participate in
78 online media spaces)

Therefore, media education and literacy have become imperative to making Uses New Media
Technologies for
online media a dynamic environment that can be engaged to its full potential. Society Moreover, participatory culture shifts the focus on literacy from individual expression to community involvement, especially among young people. Borrowing the idea of "Affinity Spaces" (Gee, 2004), Jenkins et al. (2009) state that affinity spaces have become the basis of participatory culture among young people, offering them opportunities to learn and also bridging differences of age, class, gender, race, and educational level. Furthermore, participatory culture includes both popular culture and informal learning for efficient participation in online media spaces. There are four forms of participatory culture:
1. Affiliations (forming formal and informal memberships in online
communities centred around various forms of online media such as Friendster, Facebook, message boards, metagaming, game clans, etc.)
2. Expressions (producing new forms such as digital sampling, skinning
and modding, fan video making, fan fiction writing, zines, mash-ups, etc.)
3. Collaborative Problem-Solving (working together in formal and
informal teams to complete tasks and develop new knowledge through Wikipedia, alternative reality gaming, spoiling, etc.)
4. Circulations (shaping the flow of media through podcasting and
blogging) Therefore, participatory culture combines traditional literacy skills (how to search for information, evaluate the credibility of information, synthesise and make sense of information, and make a decision and action) and new media literacy (social skills or methods of interaction with larger communities).
4.5.2 Active Audience Approach and User-Generated Content
With Web 2.0, the shift from users to produsers and consumers to prosumers has become apparent. Before the Internet, communication was followed with a top-down approach, making it passive and mostly one-way. However, audiences can participate in media production and interact with media content online. Moreover, new media platforms have enabled the common public to access, interact with and participate in the media organisation, leading to an active audience approach. An active audience approach has also initiated well-informed participation in society. The framework of the Internet also allows instantaneous reach, which further motivates individuals to shift from passive participation to active participation in the media production process. One of the key examples of this transformation is citizen journalism. Citizen journalism, as a concept, has allowed citizens to report on local issues and bring forth stories worth telling to the world. An increased availability of technologies supports the increased diversity of participatory practices. Due to the Internet's modality, there is an intensification and massification of already existing participatory practices, which gives rise to more user-generated content. Therefore, user-generated

Mobile Transition content emphasises the participation of digital media users in content production. Some examples of user-generated content are blogs, vlogs, podcasts, webzines, digital storytelling, wikiing, etc. Despite the possibility of engaging with new media technologies in the best way possible, digital participation varies on how individuals use the said technologies, wherein the distinction ranges from consumption to production (Beemt, 2010):
1. Traditionalists: Such individuals only use the Internet for browsing.
Therefore, it remains a one-way communication and is inclined towards a passive audience approach.
2. Gamers: Gamers engage with new media technologies for gaming and
similar purposes, wherein they adapt and perform alternative identities. Due to this, they partially lean towards active engagement with the Internet.
3. Networkers: Networkers, on the other hand, prefer to maintain networks
and interchange information with other networkers. They maintain blogs and vlogs and indulge in activities stimulating active audiences across the Internet.
4. Producers: Producers are the ultimate active audiences who participate
in producing user-generated content. Using various techniques and concepts, producers engage with new media technologies for writing, uploading photos and videos, graphic design, and drawing. They may also participate in civic or political engagement apart from social activities.
4.5.3 Civic Engagement and Participatory Politics
With the rising importance of new media technologies as well as their reach, large proportions of people across racial and ethnic groups have access to the Internet and use online social media regularly to stay connected with their family and friends while pursuing their interests and hobbies. Therefore, with the possibility of engaging with and participating in online media, the public can: a) Link quickly, aggregate and share information from a vast number of sources; b) Derive meaning from this jumble of information through commentary; c) Spontaneously generate online discussion communities around any given piece of information; and d) Enable discussion communities concerned with a particular issue to multiply and mutate rapidly, self-replicating viral across the Internet. Due to the public engagement with new media, a direct relationship has also been drawn between an individual's personality and their engagement with public affairs, including the political process, social movements and academic activities. Moreover, social ties can be developed with other

interested people who influence their engagement over the digital platform. Uses New Media
Technologies for
Thus, online social media networks facilitate better participation in civic Society affairs by associating with creating with multimedia content, transmedia navigation, and various other UGC formats. Similarly, participatory politics has gained traction due to new media technologies enabling horizontal and non-hierarchical communication, especially for marginalised communities. Participatory politics is a significant dimension of the political life of young people, giving them greater control, voice, and potential influence over the issues that matter most in their lives. However, participatory politics can be considered an addition to an individual's engagement rather than an alternative to other political activities. Learning how to judge the credibility of what people find online has also enabled youth to get news through participatory channels.
4.5.4 Digital Activism and New Media for Social Action
Individuals and their organisations use the Internet to organise themselves and mobilise the public by producing radio shows, newsletters, newspapers and magazines, wikis, spoof websites and sites that expose misinformation. There are predominantly four areas through which citizens can engage with new media for social action:
1. Freedom of expression through citizen journalism: User-generated
content (UGC) is increasingly used and published by mainstream media organisations. Individual citizens are researching, preparing and publishing reports for a mass audience. More capable citizens are using new media technologies, leading to better quantity and quality of UGC. Therefore, citizen journalists contribute to: a) news content; b) sharing opinions and first-hand experiences; c) collaborative content (digital storytelling, community workshops, etc.), and d) interactive journalism (collective experience).
2. Digital storytelling in identity development: Digital storytelling explores
the identity that individuals and organisations have developed in the public and not-for-profit sections. It acts as a vehicle for the voices of under-represented or marginalised groups of adults, especially women. A digital story is a personal narrative with digital technologies for public consumption online. Therefore, digital stories: a) Encourage people to conduct research; b) Foster critical thinking skills; c) Assist people to communicate effectively; d) Give people a voice; e) Encourage people to develop a community; and f) Promote creativity, digital and information literacy.

Mobile Transition 3. Intercultural skills and social action: Intercultural skills help to bridge differences, defuse conflict and set a foundation for peaceful coexistence. The basis for intercultural competence lies in the following skills: a) Self-awareness and self-respect (by examining the lens through which you view the world) b) Cultural humility and empathy (through accepting how others see the world) c) Engaged listening (in order to participate in authentic intercultural dialogue) d) Flexibility (through adapting to temporary shifts in perspective) e) Relationship building (by forging lasting cross-cultural personal bonds).
4. Freeing the mind to use new technologies for social action: New media
technologies associated with the Internet have created the most liberating intellectual and social spaces in the history of humanity. People who want to communicate with one another have found ways around government restrictions. This has resulted in more transparency and openness in the government. It has benefited marginalised and oppressed people since freedom of speech and action is now available to millions worldwide. Furthermore, social media applications, including social networking sites, blogs, podcasts, and content shares, have been used by several institutions to facilitate a participatory cultural experience. Examples of the role of social media in pushing social action are: * Collaborative editing of an article on Wikipedia * Uploading of images on Facebook * Uploading of videos on YouTube * Creation of short-term messages on Twitter Such activities enable more and more people to become media producers, distributors, and consumers. In such ways, social networks also challenge one of the former hegemonies of traditional media institutions. Therefore, online media can allow users to create and participate in online spaces for various causes, especially through user- generated content. Although there are varied forms of participation, young people actively engage with their newfound agency to participate in civic and political arenas. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the four forms of participatory culture?

82

2. Discuss the role of user-generated content in the active audience Uses New Media
Technologies for
approach. Society

3. How can an individual participate in the democratic processes with the
help of new media technologies?

4.6 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we have discussed the notion of media convergence, which stems from three forms of convergence: technological, regulatory and industrial. The dimensions of media convergence also stimulate the novelty of new media technologies towards newer experiences, other ways of representation, refined relationships between subjects and the technology, evolved concepts of identity and community and different ways of organisation and production. Additionally, the aspects of multiple media and how they contribute to the transition from old to new media have been discussed in detail. Regarding the transcendence of society due to Web 2.0 technologies, the shift in cultural and social practices has been reflected instead of a change in lifestyle, communication, mobile technologies, and new economic practices at the micro level. At the macro level, new media technologies have influenced democratic processes by introducing concepts such as e- governance, cyber laws, net neutrality, and digital literacy initiatives. However, despite the knowledge of such concepts, the dimensions of new media literacy are imperative to understand, essentially to critically assess the uses of new media technologies for and in society. Accessibility to ICTs, understanding their potential and the need for social skills and cultural competencies to ascertain the same have also been discussed. Lastly, the participatory function of new media technologies in society has been assessed in great detail. The Participatory Culture and New Media Literacy framework by Jenkins et al. (2009) has been observed to be critical for this unit section. The active audience approach and essence of user- generated content, which becomes the crux of the participatory function, delve deeper into new media participation's sociological and political approach. Finally, the possibility of civic engagement, participatory politics and digital activism, which has been made possible due to new media

Mobile Transition technologies, has been assessed from the empowerment vantage point.
4.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Couldry, N. (2013). Media, Society, World: Social Theory and Digital
Media Practice. Germany: Polity Press.
2. Lindgren, S. (2021). Digital Media and Society. United Kingdom:
SAGE Publications.
3. Lister, M., Dovey, J., Giddings, S., Kelly, K., & Grant, I. (2009). New
Media: A Critical Introduction. Oxfordshire, England: Taylor &
Francis.
4. Miller, V. (2011). Understanding Digital Culture. Thousand Oaks,
CA: SAGE.
5. Siapera, E. (2017). Understanding New Media. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE.
6. White, A. (2014). Digital Media and Society: Transforming
Economics, Politics and Social Practices. United Kingdom: Palgrave
Macmillan.
4.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The phenomenon of media convergence deals with the
interconnectedness of communication technologies, computer networks, and media content. Therefore, it brings the "three C's" together: computing, communication, and content.
2. Three dimensions of media convergence:
1. Technological convergence
2. Regulatory convergence
3. Industrial convergence
3. Characteristics of new media technologies:
1. New textual experiences
2. New ways of representing the world
3. New relationship between subjects (users and consumers) and media
technologies
4. New experiences of the relationship between embodiment, identity and
community
5. New conceptions of the biological body's relationship to technological
media
6. New patterns of organisation and production

Check Your Progress: 2 Uses New Media
Technologies for
1. New forms of social and cultural practices adapted by individuals due to Society
new media technologies:
- New ways of living
- New ways of communication
- Mobile revolution
- New economic practices
2. Influence of new media technologies on the democratic processes:
- e-Governance
- Cyber laws
- Net neutrality
- Digital literacy initiatives
3. Social skills and cultural competencies introduced by Jenkins et al.
(2009):
1. Play: the capacity to experiment with one's surroundings as a form
of problem-solving
2. Simulation: the ability to interpret and construct dynamic models of
real-world processes
3. Performance: the ability to adopt alternative identities for
improvisation and discovery
4. Appropriation: the ability to meaningfully sample and remix media
content
5. Multi-tasking: the ability to scan one's environment and shift focus onto
salient details on an ad hoc basis
6. Distributed Cognition: the ability to interact meaningfully with tools that
expand our mental capacities.
7. Collective Intelligence: the ability to pool knowledge and compare notes
with others towards a common goal
8. Judgement: the ability to evaluate the reliability and credibility of
different information sources
9. Transmedia Navigation: the ability to deal with the flow of stories and
information across multiple modalities
10. Networking: the ability to search for, synthesise, and disseminate
information
11. Negotiation: the ability to travel across diverse communities, discerning
and respecting multiple perspectives, and grasping and following alternative sets of norms Check Your Progress: 3
1. Four forms of participatory culture (Jenkins et al., 2009):

Mobile Transition - Affiliations (forming formal and informal memberships in online communities centred around various forms of online media such as Friendster, Facebook, message boards, metagaming, game clans, etc.)
- Expressions (producing new forms such as digital sampling,
skinning and modding, fan video making, fan fiction writing, zines, mash-ups, etc.)
- Collaborative Problem-Solving (working together in formal and
informal teams to complete tasks and develop new knowledge through Wikipedia, alternative reality gaming, spoiling, etc.)
- Circulations (shaping the flow of media through podcasting and
blogging)
2. Before the Internet, communication was followed with a top-down
approach, making it passive and mostly one-way. However, audiences can participate in media production and interact with media content online. The Internet's framework also allows instantaneous reach, further motivating individuals to shift from passive to active participation in media production. Due to the Internet's modality, there is an intensification and massification of already existing participatory practices, which gives rise to more user-generated content.
3. Possibilities of individuals to participate in democratic processes with
new media technologies:
- Media production and user-generated content
- Civic engagement
- Participatory politics
- Digital activism (Freedom of expression, citizen journalism, digital
storytelling, identity development, adoption of intercultural skills, social action)

Uses New Media
Technologies for
Society Block
INTERNET OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
UNIT 5
Uses of Interactive Multimedia Tools
UNIT 6
Young People in the Virtual World
UNIT 7
Challenges and Risks in the Virtual World
UNIT 8
Promotion of Alternative Media

M obile Transition

BLOCK 2 INTRODUCTION
Uses New Media
Technologies for
Society After you learn about the critical analysis of media contents in the first Block, let us move on to the contemporary digital media system. In this Block, you will understand the specific application side of information and Communication Technology (ICT) based digital platforms. Its uniqueness, usefulness, resourcefulness, etc., are explored deeply in this Block.
Unit 5: Uses of Interactive Multimedia Tools. In today's digital age,
learning is evolving rapidly, introducing innovative tools and platforms. This module explores interactive multimedia technologies, comprehensively understanding their significance and applications. We'll explore interactivity, exploring its levels and manifestations within multimedia contexts. We'll navigate through various interactive learning formats, from text to audio, video, and graphics, each offering unique engagement opportunities. Additionally, we'll examine free and open-source software for content creation and explore integrating digital games into education, distinguishing between educational and entertainment games. You will grasp interactive multimedia's role in learning and its potential for societal impact.
Unit 6: Young People in the Virtual World. Communication technologies
have revolutionised human civilisation throughout history, fostering increased literacy and immersive experiences. From Plato's concerns about the influence of theatre to modern debates on online safety, we explore the growth and expense of the virtual world. This Unit explores its impact on generational learning, the emergence of digital natives, and the participatory culture it fosters. We examine the dichotomy between the real and virtual realms, navigating the complexities of simulation-based games. Despite risks, the virtual world offers invaluable education, healthcare, and many more opportunities.
Unit 7: Challenges and Risks in the Virtual World. Before exploring cyber
security, it's essential to grasp the essence of 'cyberspace'. Coined by William Gibson, it represents a virtual realm where digital interactions occur beyond physical boundaries. Understanding cyberspace's intricacies is pivotal as we navigate evolving threats. From hacking to cyberstalking, the challenges in securing cyberspace are multifaceted. You will understand the cyber security concept, emphasising the need for robust defences and legal frameworks. By discerning between computer-related and facilitated crimes, you'll acquire insights crucial for safeguarding digital assets in an interconnected world.
Unit 8: Promotion of Alternative Media. In this Unit, we explore the
transformative impact of digital technology on media communication. As traditional media evolves into interactive platforms, alternative media emerges as a beacon of inclusivity and participatory democracy. Enabled by internet-enabled smartphones and social media, users engage in two-way communication, creating and sharing diverse content. Yet, disparities persist, hindering access for marginalised communities. Throughout this Unit, we will understand the essence of alternative media, its necessity, forms, and

M obile Transition challenges. We critically assess ownership, content creation, audience engagement, and sustainability. Cyberspace provides immense opportunities for its users. Unlike other mainstream media, digital media facilitates interactivity to engage with a wide range of audiences and subjects. As a responsible digital citizen, you must engage with this medium productively. For that, this Block would give an orientation.

Internet Opportunities Uses of Interactive
UNIT 5 USES OF INTERACTIVE
Multimedia Tools
MULTIMEDIA TOOLS
Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.2 Interactivity
5.2.1 Levels of Interactivity
5.2.2 Interactive Learning
5.2.3 Interactivity in Multimedia
5.3 Interactive Multimedia Learning Formats
5.3.1 Text
5.3.2 Audio
5.3.3 Video
5.3.4 Graphics and Animation
5.4 Interactive Multimedia Software
5.4.1 Free and Open-Source Software
5.4.2 Interactive Multimedia Tools for Content Creation
5.5 Digital Games in the Classroom
5.5.1 Educational Games vs Entertainment Games
5.5.2 Digital Games for Instruction and Learning
5.5.3 Game for Change
5.5.4 Digital Games for Awareness and Advocacy of Issues
5.6 Let Us Sum Up
5.7 Further Readings
5.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
Learning in the digital-networked space has opened up many innovative tools and spaces. Interactive multimedia technologies are immersive, activate the user, and sustain the interest and curiosity to learn, play, and apply knowledge.
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Understand the definition and nature of interactivity; * Acquire knowledge on interactive multimedia formats for learning; * Familiar with the open-source software for creating e-content and learning; and * Learn the user of games for social change through learning.

Internet Opportunities 5.2 INTERACTIVITY
and Challenges
The convergence between new technologies and the Internet has led to the unprecedented communications revolution in the twenty-first century. Interactivity has become the main adjective of this world and the media landscape. Scholars have identified that interactivity is the interweave between three elements in communication: source, medium, and message. Despite no consensus on the definition of interactivity, some scholars identify it as "most effective if a high level of interactivity between participants is involved". (Koolstra and Bos, 2011, p. 207) Finding a comprehensive definition for the term interactivity is challenging due to the overlap with many fields; for instance, some scholars identify interactivity from a communication angle, technology, education, etc. Furthermore, Quiring and Schweiger (2008) indicate that the term "interactivity" is derived from sociology and computer sciences, while communication science borrowed the term in the late 1980s to be used in communication studies. However, nowadays, interactivity is a common expression in the age of social media and the Internet. In addition, Jankins (2006) distinguishes between interactivity and participation: "Interactivity refers to the ways that new technologies have been designed to be more responsive to consumer feedback." (p. 133), while participation "is shaped by the cultural and social protocols." (p. 133).
5.2.1 Levels of Interactivity
The measure of interactivity is considered challenging because there is no consensus on its definition, and it overlaps with various sciences. Thus, the levels of interactivity are not fixed due to their connection with other knowledge. This section attempts to identify the different levels of interactivity in the context of media and education. Koolstra and Bos (2011) identify the levels of interactivity as interactive, with several elements such as synchronicity, timing flexibility, control over the content, number of participants, physical presence, use of sight, use of hearing, and use of other senses. The first level is a maximum score of interactivity, which refers to the use of a set of senses during the communication process, for instance, the use of hearing, use of sight, as well as interaction with other elements such as timing flexibility, control over the content, and the number of participants. Face-to-face communication is considered one of the levels of interactivity through interacting with the many senses, such as touch or smell. In the age of convergence blogs, online chats, and watching video clips with education, the levels of interactivity are different. Salmon (2002) identified five levels of interactivity for e-learning:
1. access and motivation,
2. online socialisation,

Internet Opportunities 3. information exchange, Uses of Interactive
Multimedia Tools
4. knowledge construction
5. development.
5.2.2 Interactive Learning
Whereas interactivity term in learning refers to the merits or interaction level of the media. It's a dynamic activity between the learning elements and the medium. Researchers identify the types of interaction in learning into five kinds of interactivity (Bannan-Ritland, 2002; North- rup, 2002), which are designed to develop the process of learning and to obtain knowledge:
1. Learner: content interaction: Learners gain awareness by learning from
the content of lectures, which are systematically arranged and redesigned to obtain effective teaching.
2. Learner: interface interaction refers to the interaction between the
interface and the human element that emerges when interacting with new technologies.
3. Learner-instructor interaction refers to the relationship between learners
and teachers who are aware of the use of new technologies in the learning process.
4. Learner interaction refers to discussions between learners and teachers,
which allow both to share their thoughts through interactive technology. This results in efficiency in learning by enriching the dialogue and information exchange.
5. Learner: self-interaction encourages learners to expose, investigate, and
build awareness through interactive technology.
5.2.3 Interactivity in Multimedia
A kind of communication known as "interactive media'' is one in which the value of the output is dependent on the value of the input. It allows users to control, integrate, and alter many different types of media, such as text, computer graphics, audio, video, and animations. This course examines the conceptual design of interaction, new media, interactivity, human-computer interaction, graphical user interfaces, digital culture, interaction design, and virtual reality. The integration of many information technologies is what makes interactive multimedia possible. These technologies include computers, data storage, telephones, and televisions. Examples of interactive multimedia Applications include video games, electronic encyclopaedias, travel guides, and educational and training programmes. Oliver Quiring and Wolfgang Schweiger (2008) argue interactivity is "a process of inter-human communication via technical means." Hence, the technical part is crucial for interactivity. They argue two types of interactivity:

Internet Opportunities 1. User-User interactivity
and Challenges
2. User-System interactivity
However, developers generate the algorithm and content of the system. Hence, user-system interactivity is user-developer communication. User-user interactivity also happens between the user and the developer. Therefore, it takes place between human beings. They propose three levels of interactivity:-
1. Action
2. Evaluation of the situation
3. Exchange of meaning
Here, evaluating the situation has a crucial impact on action and the exchange of meaning. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit
1. Define interactivity. Provide examples of interactive platforms.

2. What are the two types of interactivity?

3. Explain the levels of interactivity.

4. Name five types of interactive learning.

Internet Opportunities 5.3 INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA LEARNING Uses of Interactive
Multimedia Tools
FORMATS
The emerging multimedia platforms are dynamic and require "updates" to provide more security and stability for the content and to suit various digital platforms. It is important to understand them separately, which helps them to study converged media content. The elements of multimedia provide the learner with a more immersive experience. The file formats are now numerous and ever-emerging, but the cloud-based content made it possible to make the text, audio, video, animation and graphics interactive and seamlessly networked.
5.3.1 Text
Education technology software enables static text to become interactive e- text, which helps learning more interesting and fun and improves cognitive skills. Massive open learning, as well as other e-learning processes, along with audio-video e-text, plays an important role. While reading the text, the user can hyperlink relevant information for further reading. The text colour also plays an important role in communication with the learner. Colouring key terms and providing a pop-up-enabled brief meaning or explanation will help the learner remember and understand the meaning. The text audio reader is another interactive option that will help users who are not native English speakers. The audio-enabled text (difficult words) will enhance the user's pronunciation. It can be done using cloud-based text platforms like Google Documents, word documents on OneDrive, etc. A plain Word document linked to an online web page can also be converged with the above-discussed interactions. Some of the software is www.activelylearn.com, where you can also add interactive questions for the learners while they read the e-text, including short answers and multiple choice questions. It also conducts polls. PDF documents using software like Adobe Acrobat Reader, Foxit Reader, Libre Office, Inkscape, etc., will help add notes and annotations and highlight the text in PDF documents. Text-based content creates Doodles, Whiteboard animations, and word clouds. Word clouds are one tool used to use keywords in a study to create and highlight the most appropriate and popular terms among other text through a graphics or interactive text format.
5.3.2 Audio
Smart learning is enabled with Artificial intelligence-based communication systems like Amazon 'Alexa', Google Nest 'Mini', driving directions in maps, etc. The voice commands help navigate content and control smart gadgets. Learning with Alexa or Google Mini provided an immense opportunity not only for people who are blind but also for users who would be learning through questions, playing quizzes and other interactive tools. The digital version of newspapers on mobile applications and websites is enabled with the screen reader, where you can listen to the audio version of the content. The Indian Institute of Technology offers online courses through its popular

Internet Opportunities NPTEL platform. It offers learners video, e-text, and audio formats of the
and Challenges
lecture for download. In digital learning, audio has gained more importance as it engages users while doing other work (for example, travelling on a metro rail). Indeed, we often listen to important speaker videos on YouTube rather than watch them. Audio lectures have great potential to engage the audience's aural senses. Podcasting is another emerging area where teachers, enthusiasts, and skilled people share their expertise with the desired audiences. Ted Talks are one of the most popular series available in both video and audio formats. Learning a language requires the correct pronunciation of words. Audiobooks and audio lectures are effective ways of learning the art of language. Sound can help with motivation and focus, according to an evaluation of audio interaction. The blind students could distinguish noises with ease. Visually impaired students can feel spatiality and immersion in AudioChile, a virtual environment with 3D sound. (Sanchez, Saenz, pg. year) For those who are blind, the field of assistive technology can be highly complex and can be seen from various angles. Some of these technological advancements for blind people include smartphone-based assistive technology like Carnegie Mellon University's smartphone-based Trinetra project, which enables blind people to scan product barcodes independently; StopInfo, which provides detailed information about bus stops to blind riders, and the display reader, which enables blind people to access household appliance displays. Project Ray 4, GeorgiePhone, MIT Fifth Sense, and the portable OrCam, which has features for people who are blind and use just speech and touch, are notable advancements.
5.3.3 Video
Interactive multimedia allows learners to deliver a reaction to an online sequence and receive a response as a result of the input. In comparison, traditional videos do not offer any interactivity apart from pause and play. Interactive video is an innovative and exciting form of media that transforms video from its traditional image. Big brands worldwide spend more today to engage with their customers online via interactive videos. These brands have achieved great success as the online viewing and buying experience is more experiential. By definition, interactive videos are videos where the audience participates in the viewing experience. Unlike old-fashioned linear videos, interactive videos are not for inactive viewing; on the contrary, they incite the viewer to engage candidly with them for a more immersive experience. Though the technology behind such videos is still comparatively recent, more and more advertisers and content producers are starting to embrace it. Mobile Marketer, a U.S.-based firm, mentions in one of its recent findings that there is a forty-seven per cent increase of interest noted on average through interactive videos. Studies also specify a nine times increase in intent by a purchaser while browsing interactive videos as they provide an immersive shopping experience online. For example, a brand called Ted Bakers has online videos where viewers can purchase clothes showcased on in-action models appearing in an advertisement. In addition to e-commerce videos, 96 interactive videos are now common for product demos, storytelling data

Internet Opportunities capture and e-learning. Life Saver, for example, uses interactive elements to Uses of Interactive
Multimedia Tools
create an educational video that helps his viewers learn about saving lives while practising their decision-making ability. Interactive videos are produced by marking hotspots, which are clickable areas. When a hotspot is clicked, it leads to an action, such as more information being shown. There are two types of hotspots; the first is a static hotspot, an area in the frame that is static throughout the video. The second one is a sticky hotspot, an area anchored to move along people or objects as they move in the video, creating more engagement with the viewer. Another element of interactive videos is overlays or inset frames that appear when a hotspot is clicked on. These overlays review additional information after a keyword or a hotspot is clicked. Overlays often lead to external websites and downloadable content. The third most common element of interactive videos is branching; a frame where you get two options to choose from provides the audience with a more personalised giving experience. Another important and growing phenomenon in real estate, travel and e-commerce is 360deg interactive videos. Such videos allow the viewer to scroll in any direction across the space, giving a three-dimensional image by changing the viewing angle for an immersive experience. Mapping the course through which one will experience the video and the elements within the video is the pre-production for making interactive videos. Another common practice in making interactive videos is scripting how the branching or anchoring elements will roll out during the video and then preparing the content for each overlay or branch. Wirewax, Hapyak, and Rapt are some popular interactive video editing platforms available, apart from many developing applications that can be used on a smartphone.
5.3.4 Graphics and Animation
"Ek thithali anek thithali" is one of the first animated songs to reach large audiences in India and discuss unity and diversity on India's national television, "Door Darshan." Animation and graphics make learning fun and interactive, with users' or learners' participation. Animation can be used to learn maths, science, moral science, ethics, and other behavioural training. Complex concepts, such as the anatomy of the human body, heart functioning, space, etc., can be visualised and made interactive through animation. Virtual, augmented, and mixed-reality immersive content makes the learners' experience more realistic and effective.
5.4 INTERACTIVE MULTIMEDIA SOFTWARE
The modern learning, communicating, or marketing age is widely based on multimedia-based resources. It improves the effectiveness and efficiency of learning by engaging students at a deeper level than may otherwise be possible. Not only for learning, but it has completely changed audio and visual experiences overall in day-to-day life. Multimedia software packages add effects to amateur mobile camera shoots.

Internet Opportunities Some are built into social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and
and Challenges
Twitter. These platforms offer not only colour correction and the addition of text but also animated graphic effects, audio, and image transitions. Facebook provides an automated collage of visual memories by organising images and videos with suitable music. Interactive Multimedia Software (IMS) has bridged the gap between "real world" phenomena and their processes. The software package includes text, drawings, photographs, video clips, music, narration, animation, and simulation. The best feature of IMS is that many participants can communicate simultaneously with control. Interactive multimedia technologies can represent ideas in almost any mediated form. It gives opportunities for higher levels of engagement, improves representation and enhances inclusivity. We can say IMS provides a proper "democratic environment" of interaction. Students and the "cognitive tools" are two. The important bases of this technology are utilised by "intellectual partners" in the learning process. It creates many interactions between the partners. There are various multimedia software available in the technology market. Some are built with internet media platforms, some are available without payment, called open source software (OSS), and some are paid. We learned about built-in software earlier in this lesson. Open-source software is the most popular form of IMS. Students, teachers, the general public, and even early professionals use it. In contrast, paid IMS is mainly used by professionals, media houses, institutions, and high-end users.
5.4.1 Free and Open Source Software
Software for content creation for educational purposes is expensive due to the cost of the licence. The copyleft movement and free and open-source software brought together like-minded professionals to create royalty-free software. This has not only helped in education but also many other fields. Open source software (OSS) is called free software because it is copyright- free, and anyone can use it. So many OSS are available online and otherwise ready to create content. You can download and use it. However, many open- source software leave their trademark on the completed piece. Here, we list the ten most popular open-source multimedia software. GitHub is one of the primary sources of free and open-source software. Some of these initiatives started at MIT and other individual and group efforts. To name a few, I like Linux, GNU, UNIX, etc. The software includes learning management systems like www.moodle.org, which various universities have adopted. Moodle is enabled with assessment systems like quizzes, interactive videos, on-demand lectures, live streaming, etc. Software platforms like www.h5p.org provide interactive layers of assessment on the videos to encourage learners to play with the content-based assessment while watching the videos. Geogebra(www.geogebra.org) is another interesting software for learning mathematics available on multiple platforms and in augmented reality format.

Internet Opportunities Developing e-content can be done with the help of the following software Uses of Interactive
Multimedia Tools
during video and audio content post-production. For mobile phones, VidCutter, Shotcut, Kinemaster, Open camera, etc. For video editing on a desktop, one may use OpenShot, Avidemux, Blender (visual effects and animation), Cinelerra Infinity, Flowblade, Kdenlive, etc.
5.4.2 Interactive Multimedia Tools for Content Creation
Content marketing companies have realised that interactive content plays an important role. It has become the best way to get the audience's attention and I understand the target audience. Artificial intelligence has impacted behaviour patterns and ways of thinking. Interactive content has massive potential for virality, generating shares, comments, likes, and other social media actions that lead to developing organic traffic. There are many tools for generating interactive content. Some are designed for ready-to-use, while some need to be adjusted for desired content creation. Here, we are giving information about a few tools for creating interactive content.
1. Ion Interactive: This tool makes it easy to create interactive content,
such as e-books, landing pages, quizzes, lookbooks, calculators, etc.
2. Contentools is a well-known tool available on the market. It allows you
to create both static and dynamic content and provides materials for generating leads.
3. SurveyMonkey: One of the best tools for creating surveys, quizzes, tests
and data-based communication.
4. MapMe creates interactive maps. Companies frequently use this tool for
map-based marketing strategies.
5. Playbuzz: It gives many options for content creation and is widely used
to create community-based content. It also provides user data and metrics. There are several interactive platforms for conducting Quizzes with instant results and ranking. To mention a few, they include Kahoot, Big Button, Mentimeter, Hotpotatos, etc. They are also used for feedback. It is easy and quick to make whiteboard animation, where you can provide a visual and textual description of a concept, definition, or formula. The software available is Video Scribe, Powtoons, and Google Doodle. Canva is one of the most popular software platforms for creating interactive presentations, videos, posters, intro materials, etc. Video editing has been one of the important parts of e-content preparation. Free software like Openshot and Davinci Resolve help in video editing, while Bensound and YouTube audio for royalty-free music and Pixabay (audio- visual content free), pixels, freepik, etc. are for images, graphics and animations.

Internet Opportunities Production with mobile phones has come in handy, and several applications
and Challenges
help learners and teachers at various levels develop media content--for example, Open Camera for Shooting, Inshot, Cinema Fv5, Kinemaster, and Animaker. Animation used to be expensive and highly skilled. Now, the learner can use free and open software with all its potential features. They include Animaker, Blender, Nuke, K-3D, Opentoonz etc. Among many other software, 'Handbrake' is used for video compression for multiple digital platforms. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit
1. What do you understand about free and open-source software?

2. Explain the importance of creative commons in digital learning
environments?

5.5 DIGITAL GAMES IN THE CLASSROOM
In the classroom, playing games is one of the most effective strategies to keep pupils' attention. Historically, various games may be played, each of which is distinguished from the others in terms of culture and location. Several games are played across a variety of very similar cultures. There are several categories of games, including board games, real-world games, role- playing games, and others. In addition, the number of participants is another factor that can be used to classify these games. Games create an environment in which involvement is encouraged, and discourse contributes to the growth of a person's personality on both the physical and mental levels. Game design has also innovated with more interactivity and immersive user participation as technology advances. Digital games with well-lit screens, captivating graphics, and real-life interactivity provide a magical feeling to the users. Several games are designed not just for entertainment but for edutainment. Games for behavioural change are designed for specific purposes to address issues like mental health, learning, trauma, learning maths, etc.

Internet Opportunities 5.5.1 Educational Games vs Entertainment Games Uses of Interactive
Multimedia Tools
Educational games are different from entertainment games. Educational games aim to improve the cognitive levels of learners, focusing on skills like computing, maths, reasoning, etc. Sometimes, issues like gender sensitivity, familiarity with cultural ethos, language, grammar, and problem-solving are the focal themes. According to Prensky (2006, p. 4), "Kids learn more positive, useful things for their future from video games than they learn in school." Video is more powerful, and one can re-play, unlike a one-time lecture in the class. This does not undermine the physical classroom teaching-learning model, but maps, drawing, word games, pre-numeric, and cognitive learning help improve their skills. Gee (2007, p. 10) supports gaming by saying, "Good games are problem-solving spaces that create deep learning." It helps with quick thinking, memory, and critical thinking, and learners can explore more possibilities of solving an issue. On the other hand, entertainment games aim to provide pleasure and experience to the users or players in unrealistic situations. For example, in racing games, where hardly any traffic rules matter, the concept of an accident is not there. As soon as it gets a fatal crash, vehicles reappear, unlike in real life. Not only that, gun games push the user to more violence and inappropriate behaviour.
5.5.2 Digital Games for Instruction and Learning
Through play, repetition and discovery become two crucial parts of learning. Many students have a "sweet spot" for gaming, which makes gaming in education successful in concept acquisition, whereas book use can be more challenging. Through play, students may not even realise they are learning. There is a demand for innovation in the gaming industry. Unexpected occurrences and difficult decisions enable the gamer to continue playing. Including a story or narrative in a game can significantly engage the player. This enables constant feedback and challenges at the appropriate difficulty level while preventing frustration. Games provide a framework for problem-solving. This allows a player to "fail," meaning that a combination of hard, enjoyable, and identity-building motivates the learner to persist until the challenge is finished. This is a fruitless endeavour. Success may take some time to achieve, but growth is constant, and so is the knowledge needed to solve the problem. Games should be blended with educational objectives. For learning to occur, actions within the game must be relevant to life outside the game. Contrary to the concepts of practice and practice, games should choose an approach that simplifies the game and restricts the scope of knowledge. For a player to be successful in the game, the subject matter that must be taught through the game should be the value of knowing the relevant information. To demonstrate achievement in student learning, games must possess specific characteristics. The game should be as convincing as feasible and

Internet Opportunities challenging. The game's core activity should be participatory and engaging
and Challenges
for the pupils. Games are about decision-making, where you observe the outcomes and receive feedback. The outcome necessitates originality and innovation for a work to perform properly and run successfully. Games teach pupils about rewards and the effort required to obtain them. To advance in the game, the player must master the learning goals and objectives underlying the game. Integration, motivation, and concentration are the three components to consider while building strong and successful games. Focus is most effective when investigating, operating, or interacting while learning.
5.5.3 Game for Change
Mayer, R. E. (2019). asserts that "game-based learning is methodologically sound, theoretically grounded, and educationally relevant." Games are expressions of play which allow people to go beyond instant imagination and direct activity. Games are like ice-breaking activities conducted in a way that can be an effective tool for community participation and creating a dialogue between players. McKee et al. (1998) describe games that can enhance participatory processes discreetly placed in the learning process. It helps people to reflect, relax, energise, bring a sense of interest, create humour, "grab people in the gut", feel emotions, and induce meditation. They provide diversity, discovery and surprise through various play methods, thus keeping players involved. It triggers both sides of the brain - cognitive, logical, and emotional, creative. It stimulates perception, affection or expression, creating interest by demonstrating a thought-provoking situation. Games are expressions of play which allow people to go beyond instant imagination and direct activity. The striving point in any game is the sense of accomplishment when the players get rewards and appreciation, and different strategies are adopted to win any game. Feedback is an important component of any game, which motivates the player to play till the end. Games offer the ability to "try on" different identities and customise them with little risk of failure. A game plays an important role in the ability to earn one's own identity. (Stokes, Seggerman, Rejeski, 2007). Games play an imperative role in the lives of young people.
5.5.4 Digital Games for Awareness and Advocacy of Issues
Nowadays, digital games are used mostly to promote positive behaviours such as hand washing, maintaining hygiene, eating nutritious food, etc. Digital games also help in providing cognitive learning for the participants. Organising different group and individual activities helps in emotional and cognitive learning. Digital games are more interesting as learners/participants gain knowledge by participating in the activity through entertainment. We can use audio and video, which helps the participant/ learner get knowledge through entertainment. Digital games also help improve learning behaviour and attitudes towards positive behaviour. Participants/learners can encounter different issues and learn how to solve them using different methods, such as digital games. For

Internet Opportunities example, an HIV/AIDS counsellor can learn different counselling techniques Uses of Interactive
Multimedia Tools
to counsel High-Risk Groups like Truck drivers, Migrant labourers, Trangenders, etc. Digital games are also economically viable. For example, a participant/learner can get training using an Android phone, Zoom, Microsoft Training, etc., whereas classroom training costs more than digital training. A trainer can provide training from anywhere, and simultaneously, a participant can get an education through different activities and games. Digital games or communication empower participants/learners to share their experiences without hesitance, which helps them gain knowledge and overcome different barriers to their professional work. Digital games help learners use creative skills by involving different group activities. For example, presentations promote different health behaviours among target people and their methods. Digital games are helpful as participants/learners can learn from different activities using posters, art, and descriptions. It's useful for the learner to get close to the issues. Check Your Progress: 3 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit
1. Explain the difference between educational and entertainment games.

2. Enumerate the role of games in digital learning environments?

5.6 LET US SUM UP
As we conclude Unit 5, we've explored the vibrant landscape of interactive multimedia tools. From understanding the essence of interactivity to exploring diverse multimedia formats, we've learnt how these technologies can revolutionise the learning experience. We also learnt about open-source software and tools to create engaging e-content. In summary, this unit has given an outline of the transformative potential of interactive multimedia in education. The digital learning environment is a new emerging teaching-

Internet Opportunities learning process; the knowledge of having a better understanding of this
and Challenges
platform would give a higher leverage to harness the potential for better learning.
5.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bannan-Ritland, B. (2002). Computer-mediated communication,
learning, and interactivity: A review of the research. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 3(2), 161-179.2. Gee JP. 2007. Good Video Games and Good Learning. New York: Peter
Lang
3. Mahle, M. (2011). Effects of interactivity on student achievement and
motivation in distance education. Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 12(3), 207.4. Mayer, R. E. (2019). Computer games in education. Annual review of
psychology, 70, 531-549.5. Northrup, P. T. (2002). Online learners' preferences for interaction.
Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 3(2), 219-226
6. Prensky M. 2006. Don't Bother Me, Mom--I'm Learning. St. Paul, MN:
Paragon House
7. Quiring, O., & Schweiger, W. (2008, May 28). Interactivity: A review of
the concept and a framework for analysis. Communications, 33, 147-167.8. Salmon, G. (2002). E-tivities: The key to active online learning. Sterling,
VA: Stylus Publishing.
5.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Interactivity Definition and Examples: Interactivity refers to the dynamic
engagement between users and digital content, enabling communication or manipulation. Examples include social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter, where users interact by posting, liking, and commenting. Additionally, interactive websites feature elements such as quizzes or games, allowing users to actively participate in the content they consume.
2. Two Types of Interactivity: Interactivity encompasses user-to-user
interactions, like those found on social media platforms, where users communicate with each other. Meanwhile, user-to-system interactions involve users interacting with a system or interface, such as engaging with an online shopping platform or playing a video game.
3. Levels of Interactivity Explanation: Interactivity spans various levels,
from basic navigation to immersive experiences. These levels include exploratory interactivity (simple navigation), adaptive interactivity (personalised content), conversational interactivity (real-time communication), and immersive interactivity (virtual reality).

Internet Opportunities 4. Types of Interactive Learning: Interactive learning methods include Uses of Interactive
Multimedia Tools
simulations (virtual labs), gamification (learning through games), collaborative platforms (wikis, forums), interactive videos (with quizzes or branching scenarios), and virtual classrooms (live online sessions with interactive tools). Check Your Progress: 2
1. Free and open-source software (FOSS) refers to programs whose source
code is freely available for anyone to study, modify, and distribute. FOSS fosters collaboration, innovation, and transparency in software development. Users benefit from cost-effectiveness, customization, and community support. Examples include Linux operating systems and the LibreOffice suite.
2. Creative Commons (CC) licences enable creators to share their work
with specific permissions while retaining copyright. In digital learning environments, CC licences facilitate access to a vast array of educational resources, allowing educators and learners to reuse, remix, and redistribute content legally. This promotes innovation, collaboration, and inclusivity by breaking down barriers to knowledge sharing and fostering a culture of open education. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Educational games focus on imparting knowledge, skills, or concepts
while entertainment games prioritise amusement and enjoyment. Educational games often incorporate learning objectives and assessments, whereas entertainment games prioritise gameplay experience. Additionally, educational games are designed with instructional strategies to facilitate learning, while entertainment games may not have explicit educational goals.
2. Games in digital learning environments serve various roles:
- Facilitate active learning through interactive experiences.
- Enhance engagement and motivation by providing immediate
feedback and rewards.
- Support personalised learning experiences through adaptive
algorithms.
- Foster collaboration and social interaction among learners.
- Develop critical thinking, problem-solving, and decision-making
skills.
- Enable learners to explore complex concepts in a safe and
immersive environment.
- Offer opportunities for assessment and progress tracking.
- Promote creativity and innovation through game-based challenges
and simulations.

In ternet Opportunities
UNIT 6 YOUNG PEOPLE IN THE VIRTUAL
and Challenges
WORLD
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 The Growth and Expense of the Virtual World
6.3 Technology's Generational Impact
6.4 The Generation Alpha
6.5 Digital Natives
6.6 The Two Worlds: The Real and the Virtual
6.7 Simulation-Based Games
6.8 The Participatory Culture of the Virtual World
6.9 Let Us Sum Up
6.10 Further Readings
6.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
6.0 INTRODUCTION
In the history of communication, technologies have proved to be turning points in deciding the course of human civilisations. Whether it was the writing systems of Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Chinese or Indians, it paved the way for human progression. The inventions of the printing press, followed by telegram, radio, television and now the Internet, have transformed the communication mechanism as never before. If one looks at the technological development of these communication systems closely, one realises two very distinctive features. It has progressively made the technologies available to the masses with increased literacy; second, it has provided users with a participatory and immersive experience. While it has been the cause and effect of increased literacy, it has also, at the same time, given way to new experiences in the form of simulated reality. One such early example of simulated reality was the invention of theatres by the Greeks, which had a massive following and a captivating impact on the audience. It creates an imaginary parallel world that contrasts with reality, leaving the audience spellbound under its influence. It had the power of stimulating and raising the passion of the masses. For this reason, the Greek philosopher Plato was against the immersive practice of theatre, which he thought was a bad influence on society. According to him, it motivated young minds of impressionable age to unreasonable action and, at times, to violence. A thin line exists between these two worlds of stimulated and existential reality. This was effectively demonstrated in the cinematographic output of The Truman Show and the Matrix.

Internet Opportunities However, some harmful influences were felt with the coming of the Internet. Young People in
the Virtual World
In more recent times, the deadly Blue Whale Game was responsible for online suicides among teenagers. However, this does not mean that the world of simulated reality is devoid of virtues. On the contrary, it has played a vital role in education, healthcare, awareness programmes, entertainment and immersive learning. In addition to gaming, entertainment, and media production, simulated reality has other benefits, especially in learning and higher education. We all experienced how the world was thrown out of gear after the Coronavirus pandemic in 2020. According to one estimate, more than 87 per cent of the global student population was affected by the closure of schools and colleges. It was online learning and virtual reality that came to people's rescue. Online and virtual reality also provided working models to test products and models during global immobility in various industries. It also helped in improving productivity. Other innovations further strengthened the virtual world's role as a solution provider to various industries. The people who were at the vanguard of this technological transformation were youth. They quickly learned, adopted, and implemented new technologies to meet exigencies. As youths are early adopters of technologies, the generational impact can be felt across various stages.
6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to:
1. Understand the growth and expansion of the virtual world;
2. Discuss the technological impact on generational learning;
3. Explain the difference between the material and the virtual artefacts;
4. Discuss the various forms of simulated-based games and technologies;
5. Explain the participatory nature of the virtual world; and
6. Understand the emergence of a distinct class of digital natives.
6.2 THE GROWTH AND EXPENSE OF THE
VIRTUAL WORLD
A virtual world is an open-ended simulated environment. It creates a new identity in the form of avatars to interact with the members of a tribe. It is a virtual platform created by technological storytelling where each member plays their part. The community members could belong to a social or professional group with certain skills, thus allowing them to interact at various levels of activities. During the last decade, the growth in virtual reality has been significant. According to one estimate, there are over a billion registered users with demographic dominance of the 10-15 age groups. Augmented Reality (A.R.) and Virtual Reality (V.R.) also rapidly expanded. It has a market size of $28 billion and is expected to increase to $252 billion by 2028. According to another estimate, some 23 per cent of

Internet Opportunities AR/VR device users belong to the 25-34 age group, which shows the
and Challenges
dominance of youth in the sector. A device-based immersive experience of the virtual world has a significant share in the global trade. It has reached some 11 million devices, cutting across geographical areas. According to one estimate, the younger generation, in the age group 12-17 years, owns 75 per cent of cell phones. On average, they sent more than 3,000 messages in a month. There has also been a drastic fall in the cell phone-owning age. In the U.K. alone, some 50 per cent of the age group of 10 have a Smartphone. Also, nearly a quarter of those under four years old have tablets. An increasing dependence on these devices has led to enhanced exposure to electronic screens. It has created a debate about its impact on children's eyesight and behavioural psychology. On the positive side, these technologies have also opened a new world of knowledge, information, and learning for the youth. It has exposed them to new cultures and value systems and connected people of diverse backgrounds globally. The expansion of the virtual world also opened new opportunities for tech- savvy entrepreneurs who broke traditional business barriers. Many of the virtual businesses were initially start-ups of small businesses, but they later expanded at the global level. Multinational corporations acquired some in multimillion-dollar deals. The examples of Neopets and Club Penguin are among some of the most cited examples. Neopets is a virtual pet platform where users with currencies like Neopoints and Neocash can own and buy pets in the virtual world. While Neopoints are on-site-generated currency and can be won in the game, Neocash relates to real-world currency and can be transacted in the real world. Neopets was later acquired by Viacom, which also owns Nickelodeon. Club Penguin, an online game established in 2005, was later acquired by the Walt Disney Company. In addition, new emerging media companies like Sulake4 and Mind Candy emerged and became powerful platforms in the virtual world. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. How would you describe the significance of virtual spaces in
contemporary society?

108

Internet Opportunities 2. Discuss societal attitudes towards immersive experiences? Young People in
the Virtual World

3. What broader concepts do Neopoints exemplify, and how do they
contribute to the dynamics of online interactions and economies?

4. Explain the concept of 'bionic hearing' and its implications?

6.3 THE TECHNOLOGY'S GENERATIONAL
IMPACT
As new virtual world businesses were being established and expanding, their share in the global marketplace began having a significant impact. So much so that it began defining its users with separate and individualised identities. If we look at the history of global civilisation, technologies have defined each era, and based on it, societies have been variously defined. We are very much aware of the steam and electrical-powered machines that heralded the Industrial Revolution and the subsequent birth of industrial society. In the 21st century, expanding information and knowledge through networked computers and the Internet led to the birth of a knowledge society. However, these were the broad defining terms for which generational impact was not considered. Only in the 1960s did familial and societal generations begin to be studied more closely. During this time, technologists and sociologists observed that the invention of new technology had a much deeper and more rapid impact. Instead of bringing a major generational shift (popularly called the generation gap) every 50 or 20 years, the behavioural change in a new generation was felt every ten years or even less. Some technologies were used to define the period's youth, defining their technological identity. Although no scientific method defines the generational shift, most theories are based on broad parameters and generalisation. In some cases, the defining 109

Internet Opportunities features were sociological and demographic changes, such as at the end of
and Challenges
World War II when American society observed an increased birth rate between 1946 and the mid-1960s, leading to the labelling of the generation as baby boomers. The baby boomers were soon followed by the next generation born between the mid-1960s and the early 1980s and popularly called Generation X, based on Douglas Coupl's novel "Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture". The generation showed a marked deviation in their behaviour because of scepticism towards traditional society, leading to their disillusionment, anger and frustration with the existing realities. Generation X was taken over by Generation Y, who are popularly called millennials. They were born between the early 1980s and the latter half of the 1990s and were at the threshold of major technological change as computers and the Internet made their way. Like the previous generation, the name of the generation was derived from a book titled "Generations: The History of America's Future, 1584 to 2069", which considered the cyclic nature of human behaviour. Generation Z soon followed Generation Y, markedly different from their previous generation. Born as they were at the turn of the millennium, they were already exposed to smartphones. They spent their adolescence with the new-age technology as the iPhone arrived. Not surprisingly, three-fourths of that generation already had an iPhone. This generation has also been called iGen because of the communication device they came to be identified with. One of the features of their behavioural pattern has been an increase in screen time. They spend more time on devices, leading to social deprivation. For this generation of youth, the device helped them socialise and form group identities in the virtual world. The generation also suffered from mental health crises as they had less social support in the real world. They were found to be less self-confident, less optimistic and often unhappy with their real life. Some of them also suffered from depression and anxiety because of their inability to adapt to social realities outside. The youth born in the virtual world age were a by-product of a changing world, shaped by new technology, new socio-economic order and geopolitical forces. The fast pace of life, innovation, and an interconnected world stressed the need for self-sustainable individuals. Their individual needs were fulfilled by the emerging technology that provided immersive experience, whether in learning, entertainment or skilful gaming. The new technology proved complimentary to the changing psychology of individuals. Now, the Artificial Intelligence-driven virtual world has become efficient in providing companionship and acting as a friend, philosopher and guide, thereby reducing the need for human socialisation. This sounds futuristic and unreal to an earlier generation; the new generation seems steeped in a new digital experience.
6.4 THE GENERATION ALPHA
The rapid generational change has been most obvious during the last ten years because of accelerated technological development. This has led to the development of a new construct in the form of Generation Alpha, which is

Internet Opportunities considered a generation in the making. They are a new generational cohort, Young People in
the Virtual World
born after 2010 and are more technologically savvy. They were born in the digital age when the virtual world had already established itself. In a way, they did not inherit the virtual world but were instead born into it. They also faced the 2020 Coronavirus pandemic-led lockdown and conducted their education online, thus showing remarkable adaptability. Many of them spent their first year of educational life online. Having distinct behaviour and personality traits, their number is expected to cross two billion by 2025, thus making it the biggest generational cohort. They are the generation more driven by voice than a keyboard through virtual voice assistants like Apple's Siri and Amazon's Alexa. This Generation is hyper-connected through information highways and spends considerable time online on various virtual and social media platforms. They have also been shaped and influenced by the web and online ecosystem. Many of them have become social influences in their capacity. They were born in the age of iPads, iPhones, and apps, greatly impacting their behaviour, lifestyle and attitude. Generation Alpha are equally active on social media platforms and Instagram, with the latter sharing its origin in 2010. They were born and brought up with screens before their eyes, with a new world of online and virtual worlds. Virtually connected with the rest of the world, the generation was technologically empowered to enter a new era, shaping their engagement. Unlike the previous generation, the Alpha generation is more tolerant, open, and welcoming of new changes and believes in gender parity and inclusivity. Many Alpha generations are connected with their close environment, thus having opinions on political issues, sustainability, development and climate change. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Analyse the generational categorization of 'Generation X'?

2. Discuss the emergence of the Alpha Generation and its significance
within the context of evolving demographics?

Internet Opportunities 3. Explore the notion of 'digital natives' and its relevance in understanding
and Challenges
contemporary societal dynamics?

6.5 DIGITAL NATIVES
The virtual world has given rise to several nomenclature for its inhabitants. Digital native is one of the most popular acronyms and has recently gained coinage. It also includes a wide range of digital and virtual user experiences. Alpha generation is one of the recent subsets added to it. There are also other names, like the 'net savvy' Generation, Google Generation, and M Generation, for using Media and MySpace, which are associated with the youth. Because of deep immersion in devices and their online screen presence, the digital natives have also been called Screenagers and millennials on steroids because of their hyperactive presence in the digital space. The digital natives are youth born after 1989, showing a marked difference from the earlier generation. Digital natives are also known for their ability to get into "the zone" of the metaverse, a new form of virtual experience. One popular virtual metaverse that has gained popularity among the youth is Metaspace, which provides a 3D virtual experience to its users. Metaspace is a virtual space where youth create their avatars and get to study, work, play, dance, learn and interact with like-minded users. This also offers a play-to-earn game that enables users to earn while enjoying the virtual experience. Built on a Unity game engine, Metaspace is quite popular among youth because it is profitable and adventurous. In addition to being a game, it is an entire universe which entertains and up-skills the users. While the game-oriented virtual worlds provide users with an online adventurous experience, Social Virtual Reality (SVR), on the other hand, focuses on social interaction between digital natives. It is not guided by narrative as in the gaming virtual world and lacks level-ups, portrayal and character advancement. In short, the social virtual world becomes the site of building social character and helps its users with the simulation of behavioural science. For the youth, SVR holds special interest as it allows them to interact and socialise online. It offers immersive activities and social engagements to diverse groups of people belonging to disparate cultures, nationalities, genders and age groups. However, there is little research on the likes and dislikes of the youth on these platforms that could help its makers scale up or tone down some of its features and calibrate the outcome of the SVR space.
6.6 THE TWO WORLDS: THE REAL AND THE
VIRTUAL
For the youth, both the real and the virtual worlds are spaces for negotiating

Internet Opportunities their identities and making space for themselves. It is also a site for self- Young People in
the Virtual World
gratification and demand-fulfilling. In addition to socialisation, it offers opportunities for expressing individual personalities through varied avatars, which becomes their new identity in the virtual world. As mentioned earlier, a virtual world is a computer-simulated space where numerous individuals and avatars interact, converse, communicate and participate in common activities. It is a community of like-minded people empowered by virtual space. These community members are quite similar in their virtual space but different in personalities, skills and individual dispositions. Sometimes, the material artefacts of the real world may or may not correspond to the virtual world as the latter is based on different norms and rules of the digital space. These differences notwithstanding, there has been exponential growth in virtual spaces as they offer an opportunity for youth to connect with people, forming tribes of like-minded people. It also has the benefit of bypassing some of the limitations like physical space and unpleasant experiences on the part of the users. In addition to this, there are fewer biases and shaming based on physical deformity in the virtual world. People with disabilities can lead a normal and respectful life like any normal avatar. The virtual world has the unique feature of filtering the unwanted, thus debarring unpleasant personalities who have the potential of becoming a liability to the tribe. Recently, it has often been argued that youth spend more time online than offline, sometimes at the cost of their social life and activities. While this is true, technology has driven them in that direction. Today, youth live in a hybrid world marked by simultaneous presence, both in the real and virtual world. Their online presence has now been replaced by "inline" simultaneous real and virtual existence. They are hyper-connected with their group members through the Internet. An avatar in the virtual world enjoys multiple identities and may espouse multiple causes, including social, political, professional, and religious ideologies. While part of the virtual world, the youth is equally connected with real- world issues like sustainability, equitable development, climate change and gender issues. This is evident based on their participation in these social and political movements. Moreover, there are also connecting links between the real and the virtual world in the form of Milgram and Kishino, which provides a continuum between the two parallel worlds. Augmented reality, on the other hand, has attempted to provide a link between the real and the virtual worlds. The virtual identity of the 'born on the Internet' generation has become so overwhelming that it has become the primary source of their secondary identity in the real world. They identify themselves with their new avatar more than their real selves. Sometimes, dual identity creates disharmony for the users. The dominant identity in fulfilling their needs becomes their primary source of inspiration. Individuals sometimes create impressive avatars for public display that make them look happy, confident, and healthy. This is contrary to their real and fundamental nature in the real world. Psychologists have called this behaviour in the virtual world as wish-fulfilment. Dominant virtual avatars

Internet Opportunities are sometimes deliberately created, using technological features to dominate
and Challenges
the virtual space. These avatars can 'attend' all events and be everywhere using Internet connectivity. Sometimes, they can increase 'bionic hearing' that controls, monitors and alters the listening experiences of the users through in- ear headphones. Thus, the virtual world has its power structure, which is technologically driven and sometimes challenged by its users. Although virtual reality offers hordes of new features and experiences to its users, it could not somehow find a mass appeal like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and YouTube. Avatar-based navigation and a longer learning curve will likely deter new users. Another reason is the necessity of having an effective audiovisual ecosystem. But despite all these constraints, there has been tremendous growth in the virtual reality business, with new investments, applications, and ideas finding rapid incorporation. It could be hoped that some of these applications will find wider acceptance and be included on existing platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube.
6.7 THE SIMULATION-BASED GAMES
Computer-mediated simulation games are among the most popular virtual reality products and have been widely accepted among youth. Often considered addictive and having a bad influence on young, impressionable minds, these games have become an easy escape from the harsh reality of day-to-day living. The youth is said to get immersed in the virtual "zone," so much so that they are disconnected from the real world. Some sociologists view it as a result of social and political stratification and alienation due to unemployment, poverty and political and religious divides. The virtual world, which is participatory, offers its users a level-playing field where all members are equal. It is a platform where all differences are dissolved. Some parents prefer these virtual spaces as they offer good learning and socialisation experiences. The parents feel that it saves the child from real violence and bullying. But some experts saysome experts say there is no escape from the real world. The youth must be exposed to harsh realities during the learning process. In addition to these socialisation pressures, there is, however, hard economics involved in the gaming industry. More and more investors, business houses and multinational corporations are looking at the gaming industry as a business with a good return. In the process, they target youth as one of its biggest consumers. According to one estimate, the global revenue in gaming was US$159.3 billion in 2020, showing a growth of 9.3% over the previous year. Europe contributed US$29.6 billion, North America US$40 billion and China US$43 billion. In recent years, investments have increased, targeting countries with a youth population. Since the time gaming became popular, there have been two profit models that its users have practised. One is "pay to win", and the other is "paying for passion". In the former model, which was popular till 2015, players paid to upgrade their capabilities. They paid to add faster and stronger features, 114 which helped them stand out from their competitors. But with the launch of

Internet Opportunities Honor of Kings in 2015, the model transformed overnight where skills, Young People in
the Virtual World
abilities and spending more time chiselling the skills became the source of profitable earning. In this model, the users did not have to invest money but their time to make a profit in the virtual space. So, these platforms became new sites for fair and equitable play where a virtual avatar becomes the source of passion. Some of the other popular games, depending on the age and inclinations of the users, are Second Life for adults, Habbo for youth and Whyville for children. Habbo was one of the most popular virtual worlds in the early 2000s, with more than 10 million monthly users. However, with the introduction of gaming apps by Facebook and other social networking sites in the 2010s, the popularity of Habbo declined considerably. For the youth, Club Penguin is another popular game that has gained a good following. Pet Society and Secret Builder are other virtual world games for young children. Big business corporations like Webkinz, Bratz, and Barbie dolls have attempted novel ways to converge these virtual games with real-world objects like toys, dolls and other artefacts. This has helped consolidate revenues for the corporations and brought a sense of familiarity with the virtual world for the children. According to a study, parents view these virtual platforms as safe places for socialising and skill learning for their children. In addition to these games, there are other computer-mediated simulation games like Xbox 360 and Nintendo Wii, which are quite popular among the youth. Other games like Free Fire or Asphalt 9 have recently found considerable users. These games have helped the youth in nurturing talent. Children can be seen playing games on Roblox while communicating with friends on Discord. These virtual games have helped people come together on a common platform. In some games, there are options for a co-op split screen, as in Super Mario Galaxy, which helps the user invite a friend and participate indirectly. These virtual worlds belong to Virtual Environments (V.E.s), initially developed for the entertainment and gaming industry. The World of Warcraft and Habbo Hotel have carved a niche for themselves in this direction. At one point in time, it is interesting to note Habbo Hotel had more than 200 million registered characters and was touted as the "world's largest online community". Youth has also been using other tools like Roundme and Aurasma for self-directed learning and for developing critical thinking. To solve difficult problems, they have been using Xmind in addition to Google, One Drive, Facebook and Edmodo for communication and collaboration.
6.8 THE PARTICIPATORY CULTURE OF THE
VIRTUAL WORLD
As a result of technological innovation, the virtual world of the 21st century has become more accommodative, participatory and democratic. While the communication flow in the earlier generation was one-way, in the virtual world, it has become a seamless flow in both directions. The distance between the source and the receiver has almost diminished, allowing instant exchange of ideas, information and skills. Now, the consumer in the virtual

Internet Opportunities world has also become a creator and an active partner. As a result, the virtual
and Challenges
world has become a site of engagement for both partners with some minor modifications. For the source, the virtual world has provided them with a unique capability to participate, learn and improve the process on which the virtual world is based. The 'Web 2.0' heralded an era of 'online participatory culture' that has continued apace in a new format in the virtual world. The participants, whether in the form of new avatars or on gaming platforms, take part in real- time while being dispersed in various geographical locations. The time-space continuum seems to have shrunk in the virtual world, providing participants with a level playing field. The 'user-centric approach' has become so overwhelming that it has forced big corporations to consider the users' 'changing tastes, preferences and subcultures'. Some virtual reality platforms' designs are based on user experience to gain acceptability and authenticity. Check Your Progress: 3 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. Evaluate the phenomenon of avatar creation in virtual spaces?

2. Assess the global gaming industry's economic landscape?

3. Enumerate the evolution of virtual spaces and their impact on youth
culture?

6.9 LET US SUM UP
As we learnt, the virtual world has opened a new world of immersive experience to the youth, providing them a unique opportunity to participate in the hyper-connected world. It has given rise to generational change, leading to a new tribe of digital natives who are more dependent on new technology than any other generation before. Although the real and virtual worlds work on different levels, their conflict becomes inevitable, given their differences. There is a wide disparity between the two, and neither mirrors the live-in reality of the other. However, the participatory nature of the virtual world makes it an apt place to chisel digital skills and socialise in the ethereal world. This virtual world is not real but contains some features that are close

Internet Opportunities to the existing world. Young People in
the Virtual World
The simulation-based games have added a new dimension to the active participatory nature of the new reality world. The concept of avatars is considered an individual's alter ego, finds a vicarious fulfilment of desires, and lives a parallel life quite akin to the one they desire. While it has immense utility at the individual level, it has also led to personality disorders where the user is not able to differentiate between the two worlds clinically, leading to adaptability issues. However, These aberrations are insignificant compared to its advantage, which has found application in learning, entertainment, designing, improving productivity and engaging with diverse audience groups. This is particularly useful for youth born in the digital age and those who have mastered the art and science of the virtual world.
6.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the
Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso
2. Arora, Payal. 2019.The Next Billion Users: Digital Life Beyond the
West. London: Harvard University Press
3. Bilton, Jim. "The Loyalty Challenge: How Magazine Subscriptions
Work," In Circulation, January/February 2007.4. Briggs, Asa and Peter Burke. 2005. A Social History of the Media: From
Gutenberg to the Internet. Malden, MA: Polity Press
5. Karen Arane, Amir Behboudi, and Ran D Goldman. 2017. Virtual reality
for pain and anxiety management in children. Canadian Family Physician 63, 12 (2017), 932-934
6. Kay, Alan. "The Infobahn Is Not the Answer," Wired, May 1994.7. Library of Congress, "Radio: A Consumer Product and a Producer of
Consumption," Coolidge-Consumerism Collection,
http://lcweb2.loc.gov:8081/ammem/amrlhtml/inradio.html.
8. Mantymaki, Matti & Riemer, Kai (2014) "Digital natives in social virtual
worlds: A multi-method study of gratifications and social influences in Habbo Hotel", International Journal of Information Management, Vol. 34, No. 2, pp. 210-220.9. McLuhan, Marshall. 1964. Understanding Media: The Extensions of
Man. New York: McGraw-Hill.
10. Mintz, Steven, 2007. "The Jazz Age: The American 1920s: The
Formation of Modern American Mass Culture," Digital History
(http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/database/article_display.cfm?hhid=454
11. Ramsey, Doug. 2009. "U.C. San Diego Experts Calculate How Much
Information Americans Consume" U.C. San Diego News Center,
December 9, 2009, (http://ucsdnews.ucsd.edu/newsrel/general/12- 09Information.asp)
12. State of the Media, Project for Excellence in Journalism, The State of the

Internet Opportunities News Media 2004, (http://www.stateofthemedia.org/2004/)
and Challenges
13. Times, Henry; Heimanas, Jeremy. 2018. New Power: Hot it's changing
the 21st Century - and why you need to know. London, UK: MacMillan
14. Twinge, Jean M. 2017. iGen: Why Today's Super-Connected Kids are
Growing Up Less Rebellious, Less Happy and Completely Unprepared
for Adulthood. New York: Atria Books
15. Wallace, David Foster. 1997. "E Unibus Pluram: Television and U.S.
Fiction," in A Supposedly Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again. New York: Little Brown.
6.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Virtual spaces, such as the internet, serve as crucial platforms for
communication, collaboration, and entertainment in modern society. They transcend physical boundaries, enabling individuals to connect globally and engage in diverse activities, from social networking to immersive gaming experiences. These spaces facilitate the exchange of ideas, cultures, and information, shaping contemporary interactions and behaviours. Through virtual environments, people can explore new identities, express creativity, and form communities based on shared interests. Moreover, virtual spaces play a significant role in education, commerce, and cultural exchange, contributing to the increasingly interconnected nature of our world.
2. Throughout history, various civilizations have grappled with the
influence of immersive experiences like theatre on youth. For instance, ancient Greeks viewed theatres with scepticism, fearing their potential to corrupt the morals of young individuals through vivid portrayals of human emotions and vices. Similarly, in Roman society, theatres were often associated with decadence and moral decay, prompting concerns about their impact on impressionable minds. In Indian and Chinese cultures, similar debates arose regarding the educational and moral value of theatrical performances. These historical perspectives shed light on broader societal attitudes towards entertainment and its perceived effects on youth development.
3. Neopoints, within virtual environments, represent a form of currency or
reward system utilised for various purposes, including purchasing virtual goods, upgrading avatars, and participating in in-game activities. These points hold value within the virtual ecosystem, serving as a means of measuring achievement, progress, and status. Users can earn Neopoints through gameplay, completing tasks, or engaging in virtual economies. Additionally, Neopoints often contribute to the gamification of online experiences, incentivizing user participation and fostering engagement. Their significance extends beyond mere virtual transactions, reflecting the integration of economic principles into digital environments and the 118 evolution of online communities.

Internet Opportunities 4. 'Bionic hearing' refers to the enhancement of auditory perception through Young People in
the Virtual World
technological interventions, typically involving the use of advanced hearing devices or implants. Unlike traditional hearing aids, which amplify sound, bionic hearing technologies utilise sophisticated algorithms and sensors to mimic the functionality of the natural auditory system. By capturing, processing, and transmitting sound signals directly to the auditory nerve, these devices can restore or augment hearing capabilities in individuals with hearing impairments. Bionic hearing represents a groundbreaking advancement in the field of assistive technology, offering improved sound quality, speech intelligibility, and spatial awareness for users. Its development underscores the potential of technology to address sensory disabilities and enhance human experiences. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Generation X encompasses individuals born roughly between the mid-
1960s and early 1980s, characterised by distinct socio-cultural influences and generational traits. Growing up in the aftermath of significant social upheavals, such as the civil rights movement and the Vietnam War, Generation X is often associated with a sense of disillusionment and pragmatism. They witnessed rapid technological advancements, economic shifts, and changes in family structures, shaping their worldview and values. Generation X is known for its entrepreneurial spirit, independent mindset, and scepticism towards authority. Their experiences bridge the gap between preceding generations and subsequent digital natives, contributing to diverse perspectives within contemporary society.
2. The Alpha Generation comprises children born after the 2010s,
representing the first cohort to grow up entirely in the digital age. Raised amidst ubiquitous technology, they are characterised by their innate familiarity with digital devices, internet connectivity, and digital media. The Alpha Generation's upbringing is marked by constant exposure to screens, interactive gadgets, and online platforms, shaping their cognitive development and social interactions from an early age. Unlike previous generations, who witnessed the emergence of digital technologies, Alphas are born into a world where digital interfaces are ubiquitous, influencing every aspect of their lives. Their unique upbringing poses challenges and opportunities for education, parenting, and societal adaptation in the digital era.
3. Digital natives are individuals who have grown up immersed in digital
technologies, shaping their identities, behaviours, and relationships in profound ways. This demographic group is characterised by their fluency in navigating digital interfaces, leveraging technology for communication, learning, and entertainment. Digital natives exhibit a natural affinity towards internet-connected devices, social media platforms, and digital content creation tools. They are adept at multitasking, information processing, and online collaboration, reflecting the transformative impact of digitalization on modern lifestyles. Digital natives' experiences underscore the evolving nature of human-machine

Internet Opportunities interactions, blurring the boundaries between physical and virtual
and Challenges
realities. Their emergence poses implications for education, media consumption, and societal norms in an increasingly digitised world. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Avatar creation in virtual spaces allows users to craft digital
representations of themselves, known as avatars, to navigate and interact within digital environments. These customizable personas serve as extensions of users' identities, enabling them to express individuality, creativity, and social presence in online interactions. Through avatar creation, users can customise various aspects of appearance, personality, and behaviour, reflecting personal preferences and aspirations. Avatars facilitate social engagement, enabling users to connect with others, form communities, and participate in virtual activities. Additionally, avatar creation fosters a sense of ownership and agency within virtual environments, empowering users to shape their digital experiences and narratives.
2. The global gaming industry experienced significant growth in revenue,
reaching an estimated US$159 billion in 2020. This substantial economic impact reflects the industry's resilience and adaptability in response to changing consumer preferences, technological advancements, and market dynamics. Factors contributing to this growth include the widespread adoption of digital distribution platforms, the proliferation of mobile gaming, and the rise of esports as a mainstream entertainment phenomenon. The gaming industry's revenue encompasses various sources, including game sales, in-game purchases, subscription services, and advertising revenue. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic accelerated digital transformation trends, leading to increased demand for gaming content and online social experiences. As such, the gaming industry continues to be a lucrative sector driving innovation and cultural engagement on a global scale.
3. During the early 2000s, Habbo emerged as a popular virtual space for
youth, attracting millions of monthly users and fostering social interactions within its digital ecosystem. As a virtual community platform, Habbo provided users with customizable avatars, virtual rooms, and social features for communication and collaboration. Its appeal stemmed from its vibrant virtual environment, which facilitated socialisation, creativity, and self-expression among users. Through avatar customization, users could personalise their virtual identities and engage in a wide range of activities, including virtual parties, games, and role-playing experiences. Habbo's success highlights the growing significance of virtual communities in youth culture, shaping digital interactions and social dynamics during the early internet era.

Internet Opportunities Challenges and
UNIT 7 CHALLENGES AND RISKS IN THE
Risks in the
VIRTUAL WORLD Virtual World
Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 Concept of Cyberspace
7.2.1 Characteristics of Cyberspace
7.2.2 Issues Emerging from Cyberspace and Need for Regulation
7.3 International and National Cyber Laws
7.3.1 International Law
7.3.2 National Law
7.4 Information Technology Act, 2000
7.4.1 Electronic Signature and Electronic Records
7.4.2 Regulation of Certifying Authorities
7.4.3 Cyber Appellate Tribunal
7.4.4 Intermediaries
7.5 Cybercrimes
7.5.1 Types of Computer Crimes
7.5.2 Cybercrimes: Some Cases
7.6 Let Us Sum Up
7.7 Further Readings
7.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
In the era of rapid use of information communication technologies networks, devices and services worldwide, cyberspace has emerged as a new medium
of communication. According to the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU), International Internet bandwidth is growing rapidly worldwide, and India is among the front runner nations of the world. In India, the Internet is growing at a fast pace in cities as well as villages. More and more people are using mobile telephones, and this has further accelerated its growth in the country. The new virtual space has thus given rise to many social and national issues and has posed new challenges to deal with technology driven cybercrimes and to protect a person's privacy and intellectual rights. This Unit provides you an overview of the concept of cyberspace, cybercrimes and other issues emerging from it.
7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Discuss the concept of cyberspace; * Explain the need for regulation of cyberspace;

Internet Opportunities * Outline various issues emerged due to cyberspace;
and Challenges
* Describe cybercrimes and offences under Information Technology (IT)
Act; and
* Acquaint yourself with the law regulating cyberspace in India.
7.2 CONCEPT OF CYBERSPACE
Cyberspace represents a space created by science where various events, sharing of ideas take place with the help of the Internet connecting various computer systems and mobile phones. With the advent and growth of electronic communication, the word "cyberspace" has entered our everyday parlance. But what does this word signify? To a common person, cyberspace refers to a virtual area without limits where one can meet people and discover information on any subject through the Internet. In cyberspace you can find right, wrong or confusing answers to almost any question. This description of cyberspace is not 100% accurate, but it points out some of its important characteristics: its non- physicality, its social dimension and its functionality. According to Rebecca Bryant, Cyberspace represents "the new medium of communication, electronic communication, which is fast outmoding, or even replacing, more traditional methods of communication. It appears, then, that space and cyberspace can count as roughly equivalent conceptual entities, at least in the sense of sharing the four common sub-concepts of place: distance, size, time and route. Despite the differences, cyberspace is, in one way, intimately connected with the physical world. Cyberspace depends, for its very existence, on hardware and software, cables and routers -- it depends on physical objects existing in physical space. And, of course, this intimate connection between the two also represents a fundamental difference - physical space, if it exists, depends on nothing at all".
7.2.1 Characteristics of Cyberspace
David B. Whittle in his book, "Cyberspace: The Human Dimension", has identified three characteristics of cyberspace: (1) It is not a physical location but a virtual space. (2) One needs an access device to enter cyberspace. That means one needs some sort of physical access device (may be a computer screen, a telephone, a terminal, etc.) with an artificial processing mechanism, such as digital computing power and/or software. And that should be joined with other access devices on a network of physical connections. (3) It enables interaction and communication between individuals and groups of individuals and their creative output, largely independent of time and space.
7.2.2 Issues Emerging from Cyberspace and Need for
Regulation Today new communication technologies, usage of mobile phones and other communication devices are globally challenging the traditional notion of

Internet Opportunities jurisdiction. It has led to the possibility of invasion of the privacy of an Challenges and
Risks in the
individual. There is a need to have effective law to deal with the problems of
Virtual World
cyber social media crimes, rumour-mongering, email spoofing, spams, cyber stalking, defamation and various other cybercrimes as the impact of these crimes can be more than the conventional crimes. These cybercrimes are usually committed by the person using fake identity, not readily and easily identifiable. Further, due to anonymity and the ease of circulation it has given rise to many social debates that demand the reconciliation of the two views viz., freedom of speech and expression and the concern for maintaining basic civic peace and standards. Besides this, the major areas of concern which calls for strict regulation are: Management of Intellectual Property and to prevent Infringements in digital media; spread of terrorism, cross border taxation; cyber security which is an expensive affair as the business organisations are vulnerable to data breaches leading to loss of business opportunities and therefore needed to be secured from unauthorised access, modification or removal of data/information, data theft; authentication, data protection and data privacy of the industries, individuals and government agencies; Encryption; Protection of e-consumers from the misleading advertisements of goods and services enabling them to make informed and meaningful choices. The business organisations must manage the consumer information responsibly respecting the privacy of the individuals, but this requires strict regulators restricting the exchange and use of data. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) What are the characteristics of cyberspace?

2) Why do we need cyberspace regulation?

7.3 INTERNATIONAL AND NATIONAL CYBER
LAWS
In this section we shall briefly discuss the international and national laws which govern cyberspace.

Internet Opportunities 7.3.1 International Law
and Challenges
UNCITRAL Model law 1996, Model law on E-Signature, 2001 and United
Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in
International Contracts, 2005 constitute some international initiatives relating to cyberspace. UNCITRAL Model law 1996 -The first Model Law on E-commerce was adopted in 1996 by the United Nations Commission on International Trade and Law (UNCITRAL). The General Assembly of the United Nations adopted it by passing a resolution on 30th January 1997. The prime objective of the law was to have uniformity in law relating to e-commerce at international level and to provide equal treatment to paper-based and electronic information. India is also signatory to this Model law and hence, enacted the Information Technology Act, 2000. Model law on E-Signature, 2001(MLES) - In 2001, the Model law on E- Signature was adopted by United Nations Commission on International Trade and Law (UNCITRAL) with the aim to enable and facilitate the use of electronic signatures by establishing criteria of technical reliability for the equivalence between electronic and hand-written signatures. The law may assist countries in establishing a modern, harmonised and fair legislative framework to effectively address the legal treatment of electronic signatures and give certainty to their status. Accordingly, India passed the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008, which made necessary amendments in 2000. United Nations Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts, 2005 - It was adopted on 23 November 2005 and came into force on 1 March 2013. It recognises the fact that electronic communications play a fundamental role in promoting trade and economic development both domestically and internationally and improves the efficiency of commercial activities. It aims to provide a common solution to remove legal obstacles to the use of electronic communications in a manner acceptable to States with different legal, social and economic systems. The Electronic Communications Convention aims at facilitating the use of electronic communications in international trade by assuring that contractconcluded, and other communications exchanged electronically are as valid and enforceable as their traditional paper-based equivalents.
7.3.2 National Law
The Government of India being signatory to UNICITRAL LAW on E- commerce enacted the 2000 which was amended in the year 2008 to implement the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Signatures, 2001. Many traditional crimes which are capable of being committed with the use or aid of or through computers and technology have been brought within the definition of conventional crimes and therefore fall under the ambit of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 as amended. The Evidence Act, 1872 has been amended, section 65A and section 65B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 provides for Admissibility of electronic records as evidence. The Banker's

Internet Opportunities Book Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, have also Challenges and
Risks in the
been amended to facilitate collection of evidence to deal with cybercrimes or
Virtual World
any matter connected with such crimes. The main purpose of these amendments is to address the related issues of electronic commerce, electronic crimes and evidence and to enable further regulation regarding Electronic Fund Transfer. For further detailed information, you may visit the websiteof the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law: www.unicitral.org.
7.4 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000
The Information Technology Act, 2000 aims to provide legal recognition for the transactions carried out by the means of electronic data interchange and other means of communications commonly referred to as "Electronic Commerce", which involve the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of the communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic filing of document with the government agencies.
7.4.1 Electronic signature and Electronic records
Section 3A of the Information Technology Act provides that a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record by such electronic signature or electronic authentication technique which (a) is considered reliable; and (b) may be specified in the Second Schedule. Chapter III of the Act pertains to legal recognition of the electronic records (Section 4), electronic signature (Section 5) and their usage in Government and its agencies (Section 6). Chapter IV lays down rules for attribution of the e-record, the mode and manner of its acknowledgement and determination of time and place of dispatch and receipt of electronic records. Section 10A provides for validity of contracts formed through electronic means. Chapter V lays down conditions for secure electronic records and secure electronic signature.
7.4.2 Regulation of Certifying Authorities
The provisions relating to Regulation of Certification Authorities are given in Chapter VI of the Information Technology Act. Chapter VI deals with appointment of a controller and other officers, functions of controller, recognition of foreign certifying authorities, licence to issue electronic signature certificates - application, renewal, suspension of licence and procedure for grant or rejection of licence.
Functions of Controller
Controller of Certification authority is a focal point in the Information Technology Act, who shall discharge the functions under this Act subject to the general control and directions of the Central Government. According to Section 18 of the Information Technology Act, the Controller may perform all or any of the following functions:

Internet Opportunities a) Exercising supervision over the activities of the Certifying Authorities.
and Challenges
b) Certifying public keys of the Certifying Authorities. c) Laying down the standards to be maintained by the Certifying Authorities. d) Specifying the qualifications and experience which employees of the Certifying Authorities should possess. e) Specifying the conditions subject to which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their business. f) Specifying the contents of written, printed or visual materials and advertisements that may be distributed or used in respect of a Digital Signature Certificate and the public key. g) Specifying the form and content of a Digital Signature Certificate and the key. h) Specifying the form and way accounts shall be maintained by the Certifying Authorities. i) Specifying the terms and conditions subject to which auditors may be appointed and the remuneration to be paid to them. j) Facilitating the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying Authority either solely or jointly with other Certifying Authorities and regulation of such systems. k) Specifying the way the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their dealings with the subscribers. l) Resolving any conflict of interests between the Certifying Authorities and the subscribers. m) Laying down the duties of the Certifying Authorities. n) Maintaining a database containing the disclosure record of every Certifying Authority containing such particulars as may be specified by regulations, which shall be accessible to the public.
Powers of Controller
In Section 24 of the procedure for grant or rejection of licence is stated. According to this Section, the Controller may, on receipt of an application under Section 21(1), and after considering the documents accompanying the application and such other factors, as he deems fit, grant the licence or reject the application. However, no application shall be rejected under this section unless the applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case. Section 25 of the procedure for suspension of licence is laid down. According to this Section:
1) the Controller may, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry, as he
may think fit, that a Certifying Authority has- a) made a statement that the application for the issue or renewal of the licence is incorrect or false in material particulars;

Internet Opportunities b) failed to comply with the terms and conditions subject to which the Challenges and
Risks in the
licence was granted;
Virtual World
c) failed to maintain the procedures and standards specified in Section 30; d) contravened any provisions of this Act, its rules, regulations or orders; revoke the licence: Provided that no licence shall be revoked unless the Certifying Authority has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed revocation.
2) The Controller may, if he has reasonable cause to believe that there is
any ground for revoking a licence under the above sub-section (1), by order, suspend such licence pending the completion of any enquiry ordered by him. However, no licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding ten days unless the Certifying Authority has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed suspension.
3) No Certifying Authority whose licence has been suspended shall issue
any Digital
4) Signature Certificate during such suspension.
Sections 28 and 29 of the Act provide power to the Controller or any officer authorised by him to investigate contraventions and to access to computers and data if he has reasonable cause to suspect any contravention of the provisions of this Act, its rules or regulations.
7.4.3 Cyber Appellate Tribunal
Section 57 of Information Technology Act lays down provisions relating to Appeal to Cyber Appellate Tribunal. * Any person aggrieved by an order made by controller or an adjudicating officer under this Act may file an appeal to a Cyber Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter, within forty-five days of receipt of the copy of the said order. However, no appeal shall lie to the Cyber Appellate Tribunal from an order made by an adjudicating officer with the consent of the parties. The Cyber Appellate Tribunal can also entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of forty-five days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. * The Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall give both the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard before passing such orders. * The appeal filed before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be disposed off as expeditiously as possible with an endeavour for final disposal within six months from the date of receipt of the appeal. Procedure and powers of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal- Section 58 of Information Technology Act provides that the Cyber Appellate Tribunal has, for the purposes of discharging its functions, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying the suit.

Internet Opportunities However, the Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by
and Challenges
Section 5 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Information Technology Act and its rules. The Tribunal shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it shall have its sittings.
7.4.4 Intermediaries
Section 2(1) (w) of Information Technology Act defines: Intermediary means any person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect to that record. Intermediary includes telecom service providers; network service providers; internet service providers; web-hosting service providers; search engines; online payment sites; online- auction sites; online-marketplaces and cyber cafes. As the Internet has grown to permeate all aspects of the countries and economy; the role of Internet intermediaries in bringing together or facilitating interactions, transactions or activities between third parties on the Internet is crucial as they influence and determine access to and choice between online information, services and goods. Duties of Intermediaries: * According to Section 67 C of Information Technology Act, Intermediary shall preserve and retain such information as may be specified for such duration and in such manner and format as the Central Government may prescribe. In case of intentionally contravening this duty, the Act provides that intermediary shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term, which may extend to three years and be liable to fine. * Section 69(3) provides that the subscriber or intermediary or any person in- charge of the computer resource shall, when called upon by Central Government or a State Government or any of its officers specially authorised by the Central Government or the State Government, must extend all facilities and technical assistance to them. Intermediary will provide them access to (a) the computer resource generating, transmitting, receiving or storing such information; or (b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information; or (c) information stored in computer resources. * The Information Technology Act also deals with blocking public access of any information through any computer resource. The intermediary has to comply with the direction issued by the Government in this regard. In case, the intermediary fails to comply with the direction issued shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and be liable to fine. Role of intermediaries and the law Intermediaries play an important role and act as the tools that enable users to access information and provide new opportunities for social activities and 128 citizen participation. Their technical capacity to prevent harm by

Internet Opportunities strengthening cyber security, e-consumer security and to protect privacy and Challenges and
Risks in the
intellectual property rights are very important. It has always been the concern
Virtual World
across the world that besides certain duties and responsibilities the intermediaries must also be given protection or exemption from legal liability that could arise due to posting of illegal content by the users. In many countries like the USA and members of the European Union, there are attempts to provide legal protection to intermediaries from such user generated content. Such protection is often termed as a 'safe harbour' protection. Our Information Technology Act also provides for exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases as discussed below: Exemption from liability Under Information Technology Act intermediaries are not liable for any third-party information, data, or communication link made available to others in following cases:
1. Where the intermediary does not-
a. initiate the transmission, b. select the receiver of the transmission, and c. select or modify the information contained in the transmission;
2. Where the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his
duties under this Act and observes such other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe from time to time. Liability of intermediaries Intermediary will be liable in the following circumstances: a) Where the intermediary has conspired or abetted whether by threats or promise or otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act; b) On being notified by the appropriate Government or its agency that any information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer resource controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, if the intermediary fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource without vitiating the evidence in any manner. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Define the term 'intermediaries'.

Internet Opportunities 2) Who can file an appeal to the Cyber Appellate Tribunal?
and Challenges

7.5 CYBERCRIMES
The term cybercrime refers to the wide range of crimes that involves computers and networks, where a computer is used as a tool to commit crime or computer itself is the target of a crime or incidental to a crime. The term cybercrimes, if used in generic sense, its scope can be extended to covers many kinds of civil and criminal wrongs. The cyber-crimes are committed against individuals or property, they are also committed against an organisation - Government, non-government; company; firm or group of individuals, or against the society at large.
7.5.1 Types of Computer Crimes
Computer crimes can be categorised as given below: Conventional crimes committed through computer: There are several traditional or conventional crimes that are committed against individuals and their properties. Many of these crimes are now being committed by the aid of computers. Cyber defamation, cyber pornography, cyber stalking/harassment, cheating, digital forgery, theft, Internet fraud/ financial crimes including cheating, credit card frauds, money laundering, online gambling and sale of illegal articles, cyber terrorism etc are the crimes punishable under both Indian Penal Code and Information Technology Act. Cyber defamation (publication of a defamatory statement about someone on a website or sending of emails containing defamatory information to the known contacts of the victim) is covered under section 499 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) read with section 4 of the Information Technology Act. Cyber frauds are also covered under Section 420 IPC. Digital forgery of documents is creation of a document which one knows is not genuine and yet projects the same as if it is genuine. Fraudulent birth certificates, ID cards, etc are dealt with in various sections of IPC and Information Technology Act. Cyber stalking, i.e. repeated acts of harassment or threatening behaviour of the criminal targeting the victim with the aid of the Internet, e-mail, or other electronic communication devices to stalk another person, is a cybercrime as well as a crime under IPC. Cyber pornography, showing of sexual acts can be dealt with under Sections 292 and 293 IPC, Sections 67,67A and 67B Information Technology Act and Indecent Representation of Women's Act. Crimes committed on a computer network and related to mail: These crimes are technology driven crimes like hacking/unauthorised access, E-mail spamming, or E-mail spoofing. Email spamming means an illegal intrusion 130 into a computer system and/or network. E-mail spamming also means

Internet Opportunities sending largeamounts of mail to the victims because of which their account Challenges and
Risks in the
or mail server crashes. Email spoofing means an e-mail that appears to
Virtual World
originate from one source although it has been sent from another source. These crimes are dealt with under Indian Penal Code as well as Information Technology Act. Crimes relating to data alteration/destruction: computer vandalism, transmitting of virus/worms/Trojan horses/ logic bomb, theft of Internet hours; data diddling, salami attacks- insignificant alteration in customers account which in a single case would go completely unnoticed; phishing, etc. Data diddling is a type of cybercrime in which data is altered as it is entered into a computer system, most often by a data entry clerk or a computer virus. Phishing is a sort of cybercrime often used to steal user data, including login credentials and credit card numbers, etc. Usually, it is committed by a person under the disguise of some trustworthy entity. Section 43 of the Information Technology Act also provides for civil liability. Crimes relating to violation of Intellectual property rights- The examples are distribution of pirated software; and cybersquatting i.e., obtaining of a domain name consisting of the owner's distinctive trademark. The traditional laws for protecting intellectual property have also been applicable to the infringements taking place in digital media.
7.5.2 Cyber Crimes: Some Cases
It will be useful for you to know about some cases related to cybercrimes dealing with fake identity, defamation, cheating, and cyber pornography, publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form, etc. SMC Pneumatics (India) Pvt. Ltd. v. Jogesh Kwatra, decided by ADJ, Delhi on 12 February 2014 In this case it was alleged that defendant Jogesh Kwatra being an employee of the plaintiff company had sent derogatory, defamatory, obscene, vulgar, filthy and abusive emails to his employers as also to different subsidiaries of the said company all over the world with the aim to defame the company and its Managing Director. The plaintiff filed a suit for permanent injunction restraining the defendant from doing the above said illegal acts. The Hon'ble Judge of the Delhi High Court passed an ex-parte interim injunction observing that a prima facie case had been made out by the plaintiff and consequently restrained the defendant from sending derogatory, defamatory, obscene, vulgar, humiliating and abusive emails either to the plaintiffs or to its sister subsidiaries all over the world including their Managing Directors and their Sales and Marketing departments. The defendant was further restrained from publishing, transmitting or causing to be published any information in the actual world as also in cyberspace which is derogatory or defamatory or abusive of the plaintiffs. However, ADJ, Delhi in the judgement dated 12 February 2014 held that "this court is not in a position to accept the strongest argument on behalf of plaintiff under the circumstances in the absence of direct evidence to infer

Internet Opportunities that it was the defendant in particular, who was sending these emails - the test
and Challenges
of balance of probabilities is to be applied to the evidence available on record and not to the inferences". The issue was accordingly decided against the plaintiffs and in favour of the defendant and suit of the plaintiff was dismissed. State of Tamil Nadu Vs Suhas Katti, AMM Court, Egmore (CC No 4680 of 2004) This is considered as the first case in India of conviction under Section 67 of
2000. In this case the accused, a known family friend of the victim, was
interested in marrying her. However, the victim married another person and that marriage later ended in divorce. The accused started contacting her once again, but she turned down his marriage proposal. The accused took up harassment of the victim through the Internet by posting obscene, defamatory and annoying messages about her in the yahoo message group and then forwarding emails to the victim through a false e-mail account opened by him in the name of the victim. The posting of the message resulted in messages and phone calls from several persons to the victim who also received phone calls by people who believed she was soliciting for sex work. The accused was found guilty and sentenced for offences under section 67 of Information Technology Act 2000 and 469, 509 of the IPC. The sentence included imprisonment for two years and fine. National Association Of Software (NASSCOM), vs Ajay Sood and Others, Decided by Delhi High Court on 23 March 2005. In this case the defendants were operating a placement agency involved in head- hunting and recruitment. To obtain personal data, which they could use for purposes of headhunting, the defendants composed and sent emails to third parties in the name of NASSCOM. Plaintiff filed the suit praying for a decree of permanent injunction restraining the defendants or any person acting under their authority from circulating fraudulent E-mails purportedly originating from the plaintiff of using the trademark 'NASSCOM' or any other mark confusingly similar in relation to goods or services. Prayer for damages was made in the plaint. This landmark judgement delivered on 23rd March 2005 brings the act of "phishing" into the ambit of Indian laws even in the absence of specific legislation. The court observed that "An act which amounts to phishing, under the Indian law, would be a misrepresentation made during trade leading to confusion as to the source and origin of the email causing immense harm not only to the consumer but even the person whose name, identity or password is misused. It would also be an act of passing off as is affecting or tarnishing the image of the plaintiff, if an action is brought by the aggrieved party." The defendants in the present case admitted their illegal acts and the parties settled the matter through the recording of a compromise in the suit

Internet Opportunities proceedings. According to the terms of compromise, the defendants agreed to Challenges and
Risks in the
pay a sum of Rs1.6 million to the plaintiff as damages for violation of the
Virtual World
plaintiff's trademark rights. The court also ordered the hard disks seized from the defendants' premises to be handed over to the plaintiff who would be the owner of the hard disks. Defendants, their servants and agents were barred from circulating fraudulent e- mails purportedly originating from the plaintiff or using the trade name NASSCOM or any other name/mark and address of the plaintiff amounting to tarnishing their image. Activity-1 Go through newspaper reports and identify some cybercrimes dealing with fake identity, defamation, cheating, etc. as discussed above. Follow up the stories and analyse the outcome. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Explain the term 'phishing'.

2) What is Data Diddling?

7.6 LET US SUM UP
In this unit we discussed various aspects relating to Cyber law such as the concept of cyberspace; the need for regulation of cyberspace; cybercrimes and offences under Information Technology (IT) Act; and the law regulating cyberspace in India. Today cyberspace has emerged as a new medium of communication, a place where numbers of social and economic activities are going on leading to new challenges and new forms of crimes. Some of these involve computers and networks, where computers may be used as a tool to commit crime or computer itself is the target or computer may be considered as incidental to a crime. Therefore, the role of internet intermediaries, their technical capacity to prevent harm by strengthening cyber security, e-consumer security and in protecting privacy and intellectual property rights cannot be denied. It was

Internet Opportunities discussed that the intermediaries need to observe due diligence while
and Challenges
discharging their duties. The applicable law to govern electronic records and technology driven crimes is Information Technology Act, 2000. It was also explained that many traditional crimes which are capable of being committed with the use or aid of or through computers and technology can also be dealt with under Indian Penal Code, 1860; The Evidence Act, 1872, The Banker's Book Evidence Act, 1891and and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and others.
7.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Gibson, William, Neuromancer, HarperCollins Publishers, London,
1995, p.67
2. Pavan Duggal, Cyber Law, Universal Law Publishing Co., Delhi, Second
Edition, 2017
3. Prashant Mali, Cyber law &cybercrimes simplified, Cyber Infomedia,
4th edition. 2017
4. Vakul Sharma, Information Technology Law and Practice- Cyber Laws
and Laws Relating to E-Commerce. Universal Law Publishing - An imprint of Lexis Nexis. 5th edition. 2016
5. S.R. Myneni, Information Technology Law (Cyber Laws), Asia Law
House, 2017
7.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1) Cyberspace is not a physical location but a virtual space. One needs an
access device to entercyberspace. That means one needs some sort of physical access device (may be a computer screen, a telephone, a terminal, etc.) with an artificial processing mechanism, such as digital computing power and/or software. That should be joined with other access devices on a network of physical connections. It enables interaction and communication between individuals and groups of individuals and their creative output, largely independent of time and space.
2) Today new communication technologies, usage of mobile phones and
other communication devices are globally challenging the traditional notion of jurisdiction. This has led to the possibility of the invasion of privacy of an individual. We need effective law to deal with the problems of cyber social media crimes, rumour-mongering, e-mail spoofing, spams, cyber stalking, defamation and various other cybercrimes as the impact of these crimes can be more than the conventional crimes. These cybercrimes are usually committed by the person using fake identity thus not readily and easily identifiable.

Internet Opportunities Check Your Progress: 2 Challenges and
Risks in the
1) Section 2(1) (w) of Information Technology Act defines Intermediary Virtual World
any person who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect to that record. Intermediary includes telecom service providers; network service providers; internet service providers; web-hosting service providers; search engines; online payment sites; online-auction sites; online- marketplaces and cyber cafes.
2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by controller, or an adjudicating
officer can file an appeal to a Cyber Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter, within forty-five days of receipt of the copy of the said order. However, no appeal shall lie to the Cyber Appellate Tribunal from an order made by an adjudicating officer with the consent of the parties Check Your Progress: 3
1) Phishing is a sort of cybercrime often used to steal user data, including
login credentials and credit card numbers, etc. Usually, it is committed by a person under the disguise of some trustworthy entity.
2) Data diddling is a type of cybercrime in which data is altered as it is
entered into a computer system, most often by a data entry clerk or a computer virus.

UNIT 8 PROMOTION OF ALTERNATIVE
and Challenges
MEDIA
Structure
8.0 Introduction
8.1 Learning Outcomes
8.2 Understanding Alternative Media
8.2.1 Concept and Definition
8.2.2 Need for Alternative Media
8.2.3 Digital Media and the Forms of Alternative Media
8.3 Content and Audiences: Issues and Concerns
8.3.1 Understanding the Needs of Audiences of Alternative Media
8.3.2 Journalistic Practices: Mobile Journalism, Citizen Journalism, Community
Journalism through Virtual Communities
8.3.3 Prosumers: Participatory and interactive consumers
8.3.4 Issues in Planning, Managing and Sustaining the Medium: Cases
8.4 Alternative Media: Ownership and Control
8.4.1 Understanding Different Ownership Patterns: Critical Theories
8.4.2 Democratising Ownership
8.4.3 Revenue Models of Alternative Media
8.5 Role of Alternative Media in Society: Critical Appraisal
8.6 Let Us Sum Up
8.7 Further Readings
8.8 Keywords
8.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.0 INTRODUCTION
Digital technology has changed the ways of communication, the forms of media and media processes and most of society itself. Every media form is essentially 'digital' in the new media environments. Although the traditional media forms such as newspapers, magazines and broadcast media are still structured into a 'one-way' news processing mode, however with the very characteristic of interactivity, the digitalisation of media provides everyone with an opportunity to inform others, to make it two-way. It creates a more inclusive media experience with digital media processes where people can consume media and participate in producing the content. Alternative media practices are possible with increased access to digital technology, particularly through internet-enabled smartphones, enabling users to create audio-visual content and its easy distribution on social media. Today, with interactive digital media platforms, news and information processes facilitate alternative gathering, writing, publishing, and dissemination methods. With this, a newer form of journalism can be

Internet Opportunities observed, published and distributed on social media sites and platforms such Promotion of
Alternative Media
as YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Such content is also distributed on chat apps like WhatsApp and Telegram. However, social media is one part of digital media and a larger audience, and marginalised sections still lack access to digital participation. Against such a backdrop, there is a need to understand whether digital media is qualitatively or positively providing the way to alternative media or not. To reach the answer to the question, we will have to understand the meaning and the need for alternative media and the contents of alternative media. Also, critical questions need to be answered, such as who owns and controls the technology. Is there any relationship between the ownership of technology and control of the content? Who are the producers and consumers of alternative media content? In our endeavour to understand how digital media promotes alternative media, we will also be looking at some good practices and cases of alternative media so that we may remove the obstacles and use the insight to strengthen media practices towards an inclusive society.
8.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to : * Understand and define alternative media; * Know the importance and need for alternative media; * Describe the forms and processes of alternative media; * Explain the issues and concerns related to the content and audiences of alternative media; * Evaluate the alternative media practices and sustainability; * Critically analyse the issues of ownership and control in alternative media; and * Assess the role of alternative media in society.
8.2 UNDERSTANDING ALTERNATIVE MEDIA
Alternative media is a comparative term. It has to be seen in comparison to, let us say, mainstream media. Generally, it is observed to be the media of the people who do not find a place in mainstream media, located at the margins or not a part of the 'centre'. Thus, alternative media is important to give a voice to the voiceless. Also, it is complementary to the mainstream and essential to bridging the gaps and making society inclusive. However, to understand the need for and the processes of alternative media, we must define and conceptualise alternative media about the whole media landscape.
8.2.1 Concept and Definition
Since there is no concrete definition of alternative media (as discussed above), multiple definitions define it based on its role and functions in society. For example, in Oxford references, alternative media has been defined broadly in three ways: "community press" used by "minority groups

Internet Opportunities for campaigning"; "radical media" used for "political messages" and media
and Challenges
"other than mainstream" for promotional purposes. To elaborate, alternative media work as a 'supplement' to the mainstream media in such structures where either access to the mainstream media is not provided or representation is not inclusive of all the social, economic, cultural or political groups. Usually, alternative media processes include traditional, "relatively open and unedited" content. Participation is present in almost all forms of community media" as part of alternative communication. (UNESCO cited in Lewis, 1993, 12) Because community media evolves within minority groups, small communities, or subcultural groups within communities, they may be confined to specific geographic locations for specific purposes, such as awareness campaigns on particular issues and protest drives against issues related to civic amenities, etc. Radical press or content forms such as graffiti, political newsletters, pamphlets, etc., are also considered part of alternative media. It is used by political groups or parties that feel underrepresented by the 'corporatised' mainstream media systems to spread their political messages. As a marketing strategy, promotional tools and content for a product are sometimes categorised as alternative media. It includes cinema, music, and writings considered 'out of' the 'information-based' mainstream content. Thus, to define alternative media, one can ask, what is the alternative to what? Moreover, how is it different from the compared one? According to Atton (2004), Alternative media should be fundamentally grounded in the cultural forms of an independent media outlet. Alternative media should also possess some if not all, attributes: a reliance upon modern, evolving technology; de-professionalised organisational norms and roles; horizontal communication patterns; cultural and political radical content; innovative and independent distribution practices; and a compelling aesthetic form. (cited in Kenix, 2011). Besides this, alternative media can also be defined based on the production process. Looking at the content distinction, alternative media content is often comprised of different types of news stories and information-based content given in storytelling formats (traditional and modern) focusing on the needs and goals of a particular situation of a specific locality meant for local audiences.
8.2.2 Need for Alternative Media
In consumer societies, mass media often offers profit-driven content, ignoring the need-based content. This may include human rights, linguistic/cultural rights, the plight of people experiencing poverty, etc. For a long time, such issues have been ignored, underrepresented, or misrepresented by the mainstream media, keeping some people at the social margins. Against this backdrop, communities and sections of society start using media themselves with the help of traditional practices or modern

Internet Opportunities technology-supported small-scale media ventures. If we look at the broader Promotion of
Alternative Media
picture, the trend is not limited to the communities within a geographical area; we can notice it regarding economic or political movements for freedom. We can take the example of developing nations with special needs for communication that are not represented in international media, the newly emerging political demands of native peoples in North America, or the needs of refugees in Western European nations to create socio-cultural realities for themselves. We can borrow Denis McQuail's preposition of normative theories of press to include development media and democratic-participant media theories as a framework to be added for a need-based media approach along with the other four theories, i.e. Soviet media theory, authoritarian media theory, libertarian media theory, and, social responsibility theory of media. According to McQuail, individual citizens and minority groups must have the right to access the media, which must serve their specific communication needs, such as education, health, development, etc., and should not be controlled by the market or the state. In a participatory form, such media would be small-scale, interactive and decentralised to challenge the conventional gatekeeping process of mainstream mass media. "Democratic, grassroots involvement in small-scale media enables people to formulate their definitions of needs and goals, and, in Nyerere's phrase, 'develop themselves'." (1973, p. 60) In contemporary times, in the digital media environment, alternative media may enrich media plurality by paving the way for civic engagement and participation in citizen journalism worldwide. This can lead to a true public sphere and "fills the gaps left empty by many mainstream media narratives" (Russell, cited in Turner and Saber, 2016). Because it will widen the evidence-based journalistic content for citizens "to make informed choices and hold their governments to account" (Coulson, 2013). The strong alternative media base also supports the media ecosystem by countering misinformation and disinformation that affect the cohesiveness of any society. Also, media plurality streaming into the media system may help combat filter bubbles and eco-chambers where audiences are exposed only to content that aligns with their existing belief or ideology. In Lewis's words (1984,1), the need and role of alternative media can be concisely put as "expanding the services of mass media, challenging mass media systems and their implications. Offering alternatives to mass media systems, doing things which mass media systems cannot do." Addressing this issue requires a collaborative effort from platforms, users, and society.
8.2.3 Digital Media and the Forms of Alternative Media
The advent and development of digital media have provided a way to converge all traditional media forms into digital forms. "Digital platforms can now be regarded as key participants within the broader framework of news media; they may not be publishers, but their roles as distributors are increasingly hybrid in nature." (ABC, 2018, p. 6) With the continuously increasing spread of digital media, we witness the digital editions and additions of what used to be seen on the streets. For example, forms such as

Internet Opportunities community newsletters, fanzines, pamphlets, posters, graffiti, street theatre,
and Challenges
and puppetry are presented as digital art, films, and content as part of alternative media. "Alternative media have been so widely divergent in their approach and execution of storytelling and news reporting" (Kenix, 2011,17) Nevertheless, it is not only the 'traditional' digital; digital media provides many more avenues for alternative media practices, particularly on social media platforms. Social media has become an alternative 'public space' to voice concerns without 'margins'. Some newer forms of alternative media are evolving. For example, short-form video content or 'reels', live streaming of the content/events, and personalised interactive content. Short-form content: Reels are short, engaging videos. "This format's success can be attributed to its ability to convey information, entertainment, and creativity in a concise and visually appealing manner. User-generated content is catching up in popularity and ease." (Sridharan, 2023). For example, Instagram reels and YouTube shorts. Long-form content: Weblogs/blogs, video blogs, podcasts, etc., are long- form content published online. Blogs are text-based articles and information pieces written and combined with multimedia-supported content and hyperlinks. As the name suggests, video blogs are audio videos produced for social media consumption. Similarly, podcasts are audio programmes (now available in video formats). Community engagement on Social networking platforms: Social media platforms such as Facebook and LinkedIn provide the facility to create social media pages for community or group engagement. These pages may be kept open for public access or restricted to the members. You may publish various content, from articles and videos to information and announcements. The 'followers' of the group may actively participate by commenting and responding to the content and even for live streaming of certain events. Thus, social media platforms disseminate information and foster online communities. Digital streaming: Although on-demand digital streaming platforms such as Netflix, Zee5, Amazon Prime Video, etc. are so far proving to be an 'alternative' to the theatre for film watching, they can also be a source of alternative media content in the form of films and series made on themes concerning the lives of marginalised communities/individuals. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. List three digital media content forms used by alternative media with
examples.

Internet Opportunities 8.3 CONTENT AND AUDIENCES: ISSUES AND Promotion of
Alternative Media
CONCERNS
The more we are facilitated by digital technology, the more challenges we face concerning the credibility and authenticity of the content and the purpose of the people sharing the content behind the face of a community. Today, when the information is being fed into the 'networks' of the internet, increasingly, online communities are posing as alternative media platforms, specifically coming in the "roles of new media 'watchdog', 'fact-checker' and 'critics', creating "a new information asymmetry". Let us understand the challenges at the level of content and audiences in the environment where the audiences, increasingly, are taking the role of producer in addition to the producer.
8.3.1 Understanding the Needs of Audiences of Alternative
Media To understand the needs of the audiences of alternative media, we have to seek answers to the following questions first:
- Who are the audiences of alternative media?
- How do they access and use the content of alternative media platforms?
Let us borrow the conceptual frame given by Denis McQuail (2016) to bring an understanding of the audience, who sees audiences originating "both in society and in media and their contents" (250). With a need-based approach to media content, we see how media content fulfils the information needs of communities and societies. Here, the audience acts as a 'target group' for media content and shares "at least one significant social/cultural identifying characteristic - that of shared space and membership of a residential community." (McQuail, 2016, p. 409). Thus, the audiences of alternative media are more locale and distinctive in structured group formations. For example, women as a community, individuals with disabilities (or special abilities), rural audiences, etc. We can find the answer to the second question in the practices around media today. "new media have opened up new opportunities for the formation of very small audiences based on many different aims and identities and with the advantage of being able to serve very dispersed groups." (McQuail, 2016, p. 409) However, to make the optimum use of new media, we have to examine whether the individuals and groups at the margins can access the new digital media to make it an alternative voice. Therefore, the foremost need of audiences would be the 'access' to the 'open' or "commons" "available to anyone who wishes to participate in the networked information environment outside of the market-based proprietary framework." (Benkler, 2006 cited in Goggin, 2011, 157) Here, we can cite Seshu (2016), for example, "In India, most NGOs working with women realised that an online presence in the form of blogs, websites, and accounts in social networking sites was an important and necessary extension of the work they did offline." (250)

Internet Opportunities Access to technology-driven media alternatives transforms the 'passive'
and Challenges
audience into an active audience by prompting them to engage in activities such as commenting, sharing, editing and adding to the existing content. To access the need-based information, the audiences of alternative media use search engines and look for content in the form of podcasts, blogs, short videos, etc., that brings not only the local problems to the fore but also make people aware of their rights, sense of belonging and much more.
8.3.2 Journalistic Practices: Mobile Journalism, Citizen
Journalism, and Community Journalism through
Virtual Communities
The ease of accessing internet-based digital devices has increased users' participation through two-way communication, which is possible in new media. Smartphones, especially with camera and microphone capabilities, have opened a new world of possibilities for common people to create and produce content recognised as part of alternative voices. Handy mobile phones and faster internet speed enabled reporters to reach remote areas with comparative ease. Producing and consuming news using mobile phones is called MOJO or mobile journalism. MOJO has dramatically changed the traditional media scenario. Today, the technology is used by big media houses for live reporting and sending reports of such events, which the heavy camera setup cannot cover. By shifting to the 'digital', the media houses are practising 'digital' for news gathering, processing/producing, and distributing. For example, there has been a shift from cable news channels like Al Jazeera USA to 'mobile and online content providers'. Crowdsourcing, advanced search to find more news sources, and a content management system (CMS) to increase the reach and provide the content either on the individual app or using social media platforms/apps are all part of news processes as part of MOJO. However, the access of common people to the same digital devices, such as accessible, inexpensive smartphones, open-access software, and social media platforms that enable them to interact with the content, extends the journalistic activity from mobile journalism to citizen journalism. Consumers of news on such platforms sometimes add information or edit information by commenting on the existing content. Thus, "mobile journalism is an ongoing conversation between journalists and users" that extends to citizen journalism. (Steve Hill and Paul Bradshaw, 2019). Therefore, when we discuss events like the World Trade Centre attack of 9/11 in the USA or the London bombing of 2005, we acknowledge the alertness of the citizens who captured the event on their handy cam and mobile phone. Nevertheless, with more direct participation in journalistic content production, the scholars define citizen journalism with the notion that "the person doing the reporting is independent and does not work for a media organisation." (Hinton & Hjorth, 2013, p. 65) Today, we have ample examples of individual initiatives as part of citizen journalism. Amateurs, journalists, and activists produce journalistic content through blogging, live tweeting, video blogging, etc. Darnella Frazier, the

Internet Opportunities recipient of the Pulitzer Award, 2021 (Special Citation), set such an example Promotion of
Alternative Media
by "courageously recording the murder of George Floyd" on her mobile phone and showing it to the world through social media. Citizen journalism takes a collaborative sustaining practice when supported by the community. Therefore, we can define community journalism as the next level of citizen journalism. In the past, citizen journalism has been supported by the help of non-government organisations and self-help groups, and there are a few examples where local bodies of pro-active people have been participating in community journalism with social media platforms. Nevertheless, the major power of the internet lies in the widespread network of people, which it made possible globally. It extended citizen journalism to community journalism at almost a top level, where like-minded people with similar interests unite to raise a voice on certain issues. Campaigns such as 'Black Lives Matter' built and gained momentum after the George Floyd murder case because of the 'online activism' of the 'community of interest' online.
8.3.3 Prosumers: Participatory and Interactive Consumers
To understand how digital media promotes alternative media and journalistic practices, we can look at how the nature of consumers or users of media is increasingly transforming or shifting from being 'consumers' to 'prosumers'. Access to production-based activities and 'open publishing' "eroded [d] the dividing line between reporters and reported, between active producers and passive audience"." (Edwards, 112) Internet-based technology allows user- generated content (UGC) to be used in a two-way communication process with user-friendly interfaces. This created a new audience that participated proactively. "Produsers", as a combination of the two, i.e., producer and user, is a more sociological perspective to look at today's participatory media practice. The term was coined by Australian academician Axel Bruns (2008). This is also indicative of the shift from anonymous 'mass' audience to 'individual' audiences as a frame of reference (Athique, 2013), a digitally empowered consumer, conceptualised by Alvin Toffler (1980) in his book The Third Wave as a "prosumer". The consumers of the content are engaged in activities like video content production, skilled consumption to gain professionalism, and 'amateur professionalism'. "As this power shift becomes embraced commercially, the new centrality of prosumers to the digital economy is exemplified by the amateur video-sharing site YouTube and the participatory culture that it facilitates" (Burgess and Green, 2009, cited in Athique, 2013, 165). "A prosumer is not simply a consumer of digital services, but also a designer of digital artefacts, such as weblogs, digital music, video clips, game mods and so on." (Athique, 2013, 45) With "empowered choices armed with ready information", ordinary citizens are gaining knowledge and entering into the domains previously limited to the professionals. (Athique, 2013, 44) "What becomes clear in such accounts is how small media organisations can engage with the mainstream to get alternative grassroots viewpoints expressed...central to the approach is dialogue and persuasion rather than control. (Edwards, 113)

Internet Opportunities 8.3.4 Issues in Planning, Managing and Sustaining the
and Challenges
Medium: Cases
Social media platforms enable citizens to journalistic content and make aware that citizens are using social media for governance, as we find in the rural communities of Rajasthan's Goner village, where people make small videos, write text content and post it on social media platforms such as X (formerly Twitter) for public view and specially meant for governing bodies for solutions (Sharma & Feigelson, 2023), as "relayed pieces of information" on social media (Burgess and Green, 2009 cited in Athique, 2013, 168) Nevertheless, there are a few examples of community and alternative media which are sustaining as a true journalistic 'experiment' if not 'experience'. Following are such cases to understand the issues of planning, managing and sustaining alternative media with the help of digital media: Khabar Laharia (India): India's first digital rural news network, run by 30 women reporters and stringers in 13 Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh districts. One of India's oldest community media organisations, Khabar Lahariya, is a case of transformation from a newspaper to an online "hyperlocal channel" working through a website and YouTube. The organisation claims to have more than 5 million viewers on multiplatform news channels. The organisation trains rural women in journalism and production skills, like storyboarding and shooting using smartphones, for 6-8 months. Due to low production costs, these women can send more stories to the Delhi offices for editing and online distribution, and this is how they increasingly adapted to increase the network of rural women in community journalism. Community Initiative by Chicas Poderosas (Latin America): It is a not- for-profit organisation operating across Latin America, USA and Europe. Founded in 2013 by Mariana Santos, the community found a new pace with the 'Training the Trainers' event in 2015. Chicas Poderosas provides female journalists with the needed journalistic tools and skills in a collaborative structure. (Vuyst, 2020) To sustain the media initiative, the community runs journalism workshops and digital literacy programmes to strengthen the distribution channel. "The digitally literate Chicas Poderosas core team uses file sharing and collaborative working tools like Slack. These skills are then passed on to communities, to ensure best practice but also ease of collaboration, using the same platforms" (Turner & Saber, 2021) There are an increasing number of cases of community and alternative media today, where educational institutions (especially in cases of community radio initiatives) and NGOs (other alternative media practices and advocacy) are joining in collaborative efforts with marginalised sections and neighbourhoods towards sustainable planning and management of communication practices with an adaptive use of digital technologies. For example, some of these organisations are also shifting to apps and other cost- effective digital tools rather than websites, which are expensive to run and reach a wider audience.

Internet Opportunities Promotion of
Activity 1
Alternative Media
Identify any community media initiative of your locality and observe: * How it is using digital media platform/s. * Make a list of such platforms. Indicate what forms of content are being used by the community media. Check Your Progress 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How is citizen journalism different from mainstream/conventional
journalism?

2. Who are 'prosumers'?

8.4 ALTERNATIVE MEDIA: OWNERSHIP AND
CONTROL
Participation and inclusion of the marginalised, unheard voices in the frame of media is how alternative media can be described. However, in doing so, it needs 'ordinary' citizens at the decision-making level in organisational and managerial roles to own, if not 'control' such alternatives, as UNESCO's Third Medium-Term Plan (1990-1995) states about the alternative forms of communication, that the media may be consciously alternative in their way of operating through their organisational structure. Let us try to understand the issues, challenges, realities and solutions for achieving such a participatory media system.
8.4.1 Understanding Different Ownership Patterns: Critical
Theories In his book, Social Media: A Critical Introduction, Christian Fuchs provides an array of critical postulations given by different scholars on social media. These can be clubbed broadly into the critical theory tradition as the following:

Internet Opportunities Political Economy theory looks at information production, distribution and
and Challenges
consumption from a 'power-relation' perspective. For example, social media platforms like Facebook, X, etc., own and control the mechanism of the platforms while the users only create/produce the content. Terranova (cited in Fuchs, 2014) calls it "Web 2.0 is based on the exploitation of free labour". Also, Lovink (2008) asserts the need for economic and revenue models to bring parity for alternative/participatory media producers for their economic viability. Extending the political economy of digital and social media online, Fuchs (2008, 2010, 2014) points out how media corporations (like the old system) exploit and 'sell' the audiences to advertisers. "Internet users who form an Internet prosumer/producer commodity and are part of a surplus-value generating class that produces the commons of society" are, thus, the products for the advertising market business. The "notion of sharing" and other activities on social media platforms such as Facebook, mystifying the logic of profit, advertising and commerce" (John 2012 cited in Fuchs, 2014) can be seen in the broad spectrum of Cultural Industry theory as all such activities play a part of 'cultural capital' where everyone wants to own (here, act) to follow the fashion or trend, which ultimately result in the increasing profit of the corporates. Similarly, there is a techno-determinism perspective, where social media is seen with "techno-deterministic ideologies" and "internet-centricism" (Morozov, 2011) that run the society. On the other hand, the notion of the digital divide indicates the apprehensions controlling access to function and ownership by controlling the algorithm through content management systems (CMS), having an independent/personal digital tool by a few compared to others.
8.4.2 Democratising Ownership
The digital spaces and the increased access to them have certainly democratised the 'audiences' towards the 'right to know'; however, 'democratising ownership' is still a goal to achieve. As we discussed the critical theories, we now know that a three-fold system has to be adopted to make the ownership of alternative media of digital spaces democratic in nature:
1. Accessible infrastructure mechanism: A self-reliant internet-based
digital infrastructure with more start-ups and app developers in the country can facilitate alternative media.
2. Inclusive organisational structure: The 'sustaining' alternative media
organisations reflect optimism about the training they impart to remote and marginalised areas. However, true participation emerges when they are trained to acquire decision-making roles. Therefore, non-hierarchical, local democratic journalism should be practised with the help of tenure- based training from time to time for equal and collective decision- making powers in editorial policy decisions.

Internet Opportunities 3. Support system by all actors and stakeholders: Although alternative Promotion of
Alternative Media
media has been seen as an 'alternative', 'oppositional' media to the mainstream, however, as we have seen throughout the discussion, it is a supportive, complimentary and supplementary medium to not only the 'mainstream' media but also to the 'good governance', hence, all the societal stakeholders must come forward to make such initiatives more democratic. As Tewksbury and Rittenberg (2012,169) say, "[t]here may not be a new world order - media corporations and political elites will likely always garner the lion's share of the audience - but important components of mass society will change (and have changed already)".
8.4.3 Revenue Models of Alternative Media
Whether it is an individual citizen journalist or the reporters working in a community setting, they need some economic support to sustain their journalistic practice. It has been noticed that such initiatives manage to start with funding from donors; however, they fail to continue in the long run. To avoid that, community-based media organisations are exploring revenue models today to encourage citizen reporters to keep producing high-quality content. This includes horizontal integration, networking, and experimenting with content, apart from a simple subscription and/or donation model to generate revenue. First, we can see the example of Khabar Lahariya, which uses a horizontal integration model with online expansion for urban digital audiences and the 'offline' newspaper for the rural community. The organisation Chambal Media (which manages the revenue for the community media project) has kept the original newspaper Khabar Lahariya intact in its earlier form since it has a base of audience and credibility. On the other hand, purely online community-based organisations, such as Chicas Poderosas, look for more collaborations beyond funding. Through networking, such organisations can gain recognition as the 'global face' of alternative media. Thus, with diverse perspectives, they can achieve financial and resource support from other countries. Nevertheless, gaining audiences for serious content of alternative media is the real challenge in digital media environments where algorithm, number of clicks and views, Search Engine Optimization (SEO) and CMS are still the deciding factors for revenue generation. In such a situation, organisations and alternative media initiatives are experimenting with the content forms to the extent of 20-30 per cent of the total content to include such stories that may attract audiences easily. Lastly, we can add the 'responsibility model' of revenue by adding social actors to this list, as mentioned in the AC report of 2018: News is a public good - it serves a purpose beyond the immediate needs of advertisers and consumers- but monetising that 'good' is difficult. Hence, it has traditionally needed a cross-subsidy in the form of advertising or, in some cases, government support. (p.4)

Internet Opportunities Check Your Progress: 3
and Challenges
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. List three ways through which the ownership in alternative media
systems can be democratised.

8.5 ROLE OF ALTERNATIVE MEDIA IN
SOCIETY: CRITICAL APPRAISAL
A democratic society develops with information dissemination and awareness that stream through diverse media. Digital media has enhanced the chances of media plurality with more participation from all stakeholders. However, certain grey areas need to be worked on. First, alternative media organisations face challenges from the corporate social media platforms and sites (the major distributional channels for such organisations) concerning monetary interests, data management and control. Secondly, some media initiatives, running essentially through online communities, face serious transparency and trust issues due to their filtration policies and communication strategy to promote only a single view/perspective. Highly political, such communities lead to the formation of filter bubbles, failing the core objective of alternative media. Not to forget, "journalism has multiple roles: it monitors and curbs power; it supports and creates public debate; and it educates and entertains" (Accc,
2018) by incorporating increased crowdsourcing, transparency and accuracy
as an essential part of training, alternative media shall contain all the ethical principles which assert the diversity of perspectives. Also, this will enable 'networked journalism' that incorporates both trained journalists and citizen journalists, enjoying the strengths of both forms of news gathering and reportage (Bruns et al., 2009,205). Activity 2 Identify any one alternative media initiative in your locality. Critically examine it for: * the inclusivity of organisational structure * the inclusive representation in the content Write a report in 300 words.

Internet Opportunities 8.6 LET US SUM UP Promotion of
Alternative Media
In this Unit, we discussed various concepts and perspectives on understanding alternative media, and thus, we attempted to define alternative media. The social structure was explained to understand the need for alternative media. With forms of digital media platforms and content, we were able to see and locate how alternative media practices are being adapted to new media environments. We discussed various digital media forms, such as short forms like shorts and reels and long forms like blogs and podcasts. Also, we learned about social media spaces for community engagement that are utilised for alternative media projects. The advent of new media technologies has transformed the production of journalistic content and the nature of audiences. By facilitating two-way communication in mass media structures, audiences are also prompted to participate in content production proactively. This led to newer forms of journalism, such as mobile journalism (MOJO), to enrich and widen the scope of citizen and community journalism. Thus, prosumers are the new actors in the media process. However, there are challenges in planning, managing and sustaining alternative media initiatives. We tried to understand the good practices adopted by certain community media initiatives in this regard in the Unit. We discussed the issues and challenges of ownership and emerging patterns with the help of various critical theories and tried to find possible solutions. With a practical approach, we see how various media organisations from the alternative media arena are emerging with adaptive revenue models for economic sustainability. We hope the discussion will enable you to critically examine the role, function, and structures of alternative media initiatives in society and assess them as part of the efforts to democratise the media spaces in this digital age.
8.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. Athique, A. (2013). Digital Media and Society: An Introduction.
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
2. Bruns, A. (2008). Blogs, Wikipedia, Second Life, and Beyond: From
Production to Produsage. New York, NY: Peter Lang.
3. Bruns, A., Wilson, J.A., & Saunders, B.J. (2009). 'Citizen journalism as
social networking: Reporting the 2007 Australian Federal Elections'. In
S. Allan & E. Thorsen (Eds.), Citizen Journalism: Global Perspectives
(pp. 197-208). New York, NY: Peter Lang.
4. Edwards, M. (2003). Key Ideas in Media and Cultural Studies.
Cheltenham, UK: Nelson Thornes.
5. Fuchs, C. (2014). Social Media: A Critical Introduction. London: Sage.
6. Goggin, G. (2011). Global Mobile Media. New York, NY: Routledge.
7. Hinton, S., & Hjorth, L. (2013). Understanding Social Media. London,
UK: Sage.

Internet Opportunities 8. Kenix, L.J. (2011). Alternative and Mainstream Media: The Converging
and Challenges
Spectrum. London, UK: Bloomsbury.
9. Lewis, P.M. (1993). Alternative Media: Linking Global and Local.
UNESCO Publishing.
10. McQuail, D. (2010). McQuail's Mass Communication Theory (6th
edition). New Delhi, India: Sage.
11. Seshu, G. (2016). Women and the Internet in India: Denial of Access and
the Censorship of Abuse. In S.S. Narayan & S. Narayanan (Eds.), India Connected: Mapping the Impact of New Media (pp. 237-260). New Delhi, India: Sage.
12. Sharma, R., & Feigelson, K. (2023). Global Villages: Media and Cultural
Industry in Rural India. In Communicator. LVIII(3).
13. Sridharan, S. (2023, May 30). 'The Changing Dynamics of Modern
Media in India'. In Business World. https://www.businessworld.in/
article/The-Changing-Dynamics-Of-Modern-Media-In-India/30-05- 2023-478429/ retrieved on June 10, 2023.14. Tewksbury, D., & Rittenberg, J. (2012). News on the Internet:
Information and Citizenship in the 21st Century. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
15. Toffler, A. (1980). The Third Wave. New York, NY: Bantam Books.
16. Turner, J., & Saber, D. (2021). Understanding factors and barriers to
alternative media development in emerging economies: Learning from the Check Global Project. In FirstMonday, Volume 26, Number 2 - 1 February 2021 at https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/ download/11370/10066 doi: https://dx.doi.org/10.5210/fm.v26i2.11370 Retrieved on June 11, 2023.17. Vuyst, S.D. (2020). Hacking Gender and Technology in Journalism.
New York, NY: Routledge.
18. [ACCC commissioned report - The impact of digital platforms on news
and journalistic content, Centre for Media Transition](https://www.accc. gov.au/system/files/ACCC+commissioned+report+-+The+impact+of+ digital+platforms+on+news+and+journalistic+content,+Centre+for+ Media+Transition+(2).pdf)
19. [Chicas Poderosas](https://www.chicaspoderosas.org)
20. [Khabar Lahariya](https://khabarlahariya.org)
21. [Oxford Reference] https://www.oxfordreference.com/display/ 10.1093/
oi/authority.20110803095406512;jsessionid=ABC43B3D540650B84
AF21BAEA03998DE
8.8 KEYWORDS
User-Generated Content: Content produced by the users or audiences of internet-based media platforms/sites.
150 Filter bubble: The process of limiting the content a person can see and

Internet Opportunities access through personalised searches, recommendation systems, and Promotion of
Alternative Media
algorithmic bias inherent in the internet-based media system. Crowdsourcing: Seeking information, input or news story ideas from people on social media or internet-based platforms/websites.
8.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The three digital media content forms used by alternative media are:
1. Short-form content such as - short videos. For example, Instagram reels,
YouTube shorts, etc.
2. Long-form content, including long videos/documentaries and articles.
For example, blogs, V blogs, podcasts, etc.
3. Page-based content meant for community engagement. For example,
Facebook page and discussion forums on other social media platforms to connect and engage with more people. Check Your Progress: 2
1. While mainstream media is based on a more structural and organisational
structure limited to professional journalists and media owners, citizen journalism is open to more direct participation in journalistic content production by all common citizens. Citizen journalists are independent reporters who do not work for a formal media organisation.
2. Prosumers are proactive users of internet-based digital platforms/sites
who produce content and actively participate in online communication processes. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The three ways through which the ownership in alternative media
systems can be democratised are: a) Accessible infrastructure mechanism b) Inclusive organisational structure c) Support system by all actors and stakeholders

and Challenges

Internet Opportunities Promotion of
Alternative Media
Block
DIGITAL INFORMATION LITERACY
UNIT 9
Information Literacy
UNIT 10
Applications of Information Literacy
UNIT 11
Learning Environments & Information Literacy
UNIT 12
Digital Information Processing

and Challenges

Internet Opportunities
BLOCK 3 INTRODUCTION
Promotion of
Alternative Media
One of the main dimensions of media literacy is that a user needs to know how to use methods and means to collect information about any issues, problems, crises, interests, or curiosity. Realising that you need more information about your situation and, at the same time, having the skills and competencies to collect that information from trustworthy places is the crux of this Block--Information Literacy. In this Block, we explore information literacy from digital media perspectives.
Unit 9 Information Literacy. Throughout this Unit, we will explore the core
concepts, theories, and models that underpin Information Literacy (IL). We'll understand the various definitions and models, including the SCONUL 7 Pillars of IL and UNESCO IL Standard, alongside the Swiss Standards for Information Literacy. You'll discover the pivotal role of libraries in IL instruction and dissect the Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education. Through this Unit, you'll be equipped with the knowledge and skills to navigate the information landscape confidently and critically.
Unit 10: Applications of Information Literacy. In today's digital age,
information permeates every aspect of our lives, influencing decision- making, shaping opinions, and driving societal progress. This Unit revolves around the fundamental principles of information literacy, equipping you with the essential skills to navigate and harness the vast sea of information available. Information literacy encompasses locating, evaluating, and effectively utilising information from various sources. Understanding its significance is crucial in a world where misinformation and data overload abound. By mastering information literacy, you empower yourself to make informed choices, contribute meaningfully to discussions, and engage critically with the world. Throughout this Unit, we will explore the historical evolution of information literacy and key concepts such as meta-literacy and digital citizenship. We will also examine the role of library professionals and educators in promoting information literacy.
Unit 11: Learning Environment and Information Literacy. This Unit
explains the transformative realm of online learning, propelled by the boundless capabilities of the Internet. Within virtual environments, students and educators engage in dynamic interactions facilitated by various tools, fostering collaboration and personalised learning experiences. The global shift to online education, accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, highlights the indispensability of understanding the determinants of online learning, including disruptive technologies and information literacy. As we navigate this digital landscape, we will explore the intricacies of self-regulated learning and the evolving role of libraries in providing access to knowledge.
Unit 12: Digital Information Processing. In today's digital age, information
is omnipresent and pivotal to our daily lives, influencing decisions and actions across various domains. This Unit explores the intricate realm of digital information, encompassing its structure, processing, storage, and ethical considerations. As we navigate this Unit, we will explore the essence

I nternet Opportunities of digital information, unravelling its inherent characteristics and the
and Challenges
mechanisms involved in its processing. We will scrutinise the nuances of Creative Commons licences, elucidating their relevance in promoting knowledge dissemination while safeguarding intellectual property rights. You will grasp the fundamentals of digital information and cultivate the skills to navigate the digital landscape with prudence and proficiency. With an understanding of the nuances of information literacy, you should realise the need for information to tackle your situation and collect that information from reliable sources. That is this Block's aim; we hope you will grasp those from these Units.

UNIT 9 INFORMATION LITERACY
Information Literacy Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Information Literacy: Concept
9.3 Definitions of Information Literacy
9.4 Information Literacy Models
9.4.1 SCONUL 7 Pillars of Information Literacy, Core Model for Higher Education
9.5 Information Literacy Standards
9.5.1 UNESCO IL Standard
9.5.2 Swiss Standards for Information Literacy
9.5.3 The Nine Information Literacy Standards for Student Learning
9.6 Library's Role Information Literacy Instruction
9.7 Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education: Use
of the Standards
9.8 Information Literacy Practices
9.9 Information Literacy Rubrics
9.10 Information Literacy Curriculum Outline
9.11 Let Us Sum Up
9.12 Keywords
9.13 Further Readings
9.14 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
In our ever-evolving digital landscape, the ability to navigate, evaluate, and utilise information effectively is paramount. This Unit will explain the core concepts, models, standards, and practices of information literacy, providing you with a comprehensive understanding of this essential skill set. This Unit explores the concept of information literacy, examining various definitions and understanding its significance in today's information-rich environment. Also you will learn the prominent information literacy models, such as the SCONUL 7 Pillars and UNESCO IL Standard, shedding light on their frameworks and applications. Also you will explore different information literacy standards, including those set by UNESCO and Switzerland, to grasp the global perspective on this crucial competency. Understanding the pivotal role of libraries in information literacy instruction, we will discuss how they support and facilitate the development of these skills among learners. The practical applications of information literacy through competency standards, practices, rubrics, and curriculum outlines also explained.

Digital Information 9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Literacy After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Discuss the concept and theory of information literacy (IL); * Explain the information literacy standards in terms of students learning; * Explain the main models of information literacy; * Understand the various Information Literacy models
9.2 INFORMATION LITERACY: CONCEPT
Information literacy has become a survival skill for contemporary society. It entails individuals who are skilled in using information. Information is available through libraries, community resources, special interest organisations, media, and the Internet--and increasingly, information comes to individuals in unfiltered formats, raising questions about its authenticity, validity, and reliability. In addition, information is available through multiple media, including graphical, aural, and textual, which pose new challenges for individuals in evaluating and understanding it. The uncertain quality and expanding quantity of information pose large challenges for society. The abundance of information will not create a more informed citizenry without a complementary cluster of abilities necessary to use information effectively. In such a scenario where we expect people to make informed decisions independently, the relevance of IL increases manifold. Be it any organisation, association, or profession, IL is and will remain an important dimension irrespective of gender, country, status, age, or other social indicators. Information literacy (IL) is the term used to describe the efficient and competent handling of information. The American Library Association (ALA) describes IL as the ability to locate, evaluate, and use information. It is a set of abilities requiring individuals to "recognise when information is needed and have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information." Fig. 9.1: Attributes of an IL person

It forms the basis for lifelong learning. It is common to all disciplines, Information Literacy learning environments, and all levels of education. It enables learners to master content, extend their investigations, become more self-directed, and assume greater control over their learning. An information-literate individual can: Fig. 9.2: Attributes of an IL person IL helps people understand the issues surrounding the ethical and legal use of information, including access to and use of information. Information literacy ranks among the most important qualifications for success in study and the profession of an information society. In higher education, information literacy is primarily promoted by libraries, which have, in recent years, expanded on their original offers of library launches and research courses to meet the optimal placement of skills for the information society. Rockman rightly observes, "Information literacy is no longer just a library issue. It is the critical campus-wide issue for the 21st century, of keen importance to all educational stakeholders, including faculty, librarians, and administrators".

Digital Information 9.3 DEFINITIONS OF INFORMATION
Literacy
LITERACY
* CILIP has defined information literacy as "knowing when and why you need information, where to find it, and how to evaluate, use, and communicate it in an ethical manner." * SCONUL defines information literacy as "Information literate people who demonstrate an awareness of how they gather, use, manage, synthesise, and create information and data in an ethical manner and will have the information skills to do so effectively." * The Joint Information Services Committee (JISC) uses i-skills to describe information literacy and IT skills. i-skills are defined as "the ability to identify, assess, retrieve, evaluate, adapt, organise, and communicate information within an iterative context of review and reflection. Fig. 9.3: IL landscape
9.4 INFORMATION LITERACY MODELS
Models represent the information-seeking process you go through when seeking information to answer questions, complete an assignment, or explore something you're curious about. The process can be very direct, simple, or complex--a lot depends on the questions you're trying to answer or the problem you must solve. Models were developed to define information literacy and outline the information-seeking process (information problem- solving process, the research process). They are like a roadmap for navigating through the information-seeking process. Sometimes, we take one path, and sometimes another--how we find, analyse, and use information depends on many things, including how we learn, the

available resources, the task in our hands, and what we may already know Information Literacy about the topic. Several widely known models of IL have been developed through research and evaluation. There are many similarities among the models. There is more agreement than disagreement among the models. Some well-known Information Literacy models are: Kuhlthau-Information Seeking; Eisenberg & Berkowitz - The Big6 Skills; Irving-Information Skills; Pitts & Stripling - Research Process; New South Wales - Information Process; Loertscher - Information Literacy Model; Follett - Information Skills Model; Netsavy Model; Info Ohio - DIALOGUE Model; and SCONUL - Seven Pillars Model.
9.4.1 SCONUL 7 pillars of Information Literacy, Core
Model for Higher Education
This model has been used to build the Learning outcomes for Information and Research Skills. SCONUL (Society of College, National, and University Libraries) updated its original seven-pillar framework in April 2011 to account for the changing terminology and concepts surrounding information literacy. This new framework is student and outcome-focused. Data
1. Identify: Able to identify a personal need for information
2. Scope: Can assess current knowledge and identify gaps
3. Plan: Can construct strategies for locating information and data
4. Gather: Can locate and access the information and data they need
5. Evaluate: Can review the research process and compare and evaluate
information and
6. Manage: Can organise information professionally and ethically
7. Present: Can apply the knowledge gained: presenting the results of their
research, synthesising new and old information and data to create new knowledge and disseminating it in various ways.

Literacy Fig. 9.4: SCONUL 7 pillars IL, Core Model for Higher Education Fig. 9.5: skill and competencies associated with SCONUL 7 pillars IL model

Check Your Progress: 1 Information
Literacy Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Define information literacy and explain its significance in the context of
higher education.

2. Compare and contrast different models of information literacy, such as
the SCONUL 7 Pillars and UNESCO IL Standard.

3. Discuss the role of libraries in information literacy instruction and how
they contribute to enhancing students' information literacy skills.

4. Analyse the nine information literacy standards and their relevance in
contemporary educational settings.

5. Evaluate the effectiveness of information literacy rubrics in assessing
students' information literacy competencies.

7. Explain the concept of information literacy practices and provide
examples of how they can be applied in academic and professional contexts.

9.5 INFORMATION LITERACY STANDARDS
Many definitions and models were created to define the information literacy concept. The true challenge has been how to create an information-literate

Digital Information society. One initiative to meet this challenge has been to develop IL Literacy standards. Standards have been developed through a cooperative and collaborative process that includes representatives from all stakeholders. Information literacy standards established for different levels developed to be customised for the specific environment, translated into many other languages, contain performance indicators, can be used to frame curriculum objectives, learning outcomes and assessment criteria, and serve as guidelines for faculty, librarians, and others in developing IL programs. There is one standard for each expected skill. Every standard has many (as many as needed) performance indicators. There are several expected results (outcomes) for each indicator. All students are expected to demonstrate all of the competencies but not to the same level of proficiency or at the same speed. Some disciplines may place greater emphasis on the mastery of certain competencies. US - Information Literacy Standards for Student Learning (K-
12) - AASL & AECT, 1998; US - Information Literacy Competency
Standards for Higher Education - ACRL, 2000; Australia & New Zealand - Information Literacy Framework: principles, standards and practice. ANZIIL & CAUL, 2004; and International Standards - IFLA, 2006 are some IL standards implemented and practised.
9.5.1 UNESCO IL Standard
9.5.2 Swiss Standards for Information Literacy
The Swiss standards and the associated competency grid enable consistent placement and promotion of IL at various universities. They guide the design of courses and course offerings and enable the development of compatible

university cross-training concepts. These standards support the collaboration Information Literacy between library staff and faculty of various disciplines and facilitate agreements between libraries and university administration. This shows that information literacy can be understood as an interaction of different sub- competencies, and various information literacy models emphasise this aspect by presenting a procedural sequence of sub-competencies. Despite some widespread definitions, there is no generally accepted understanding of information literacy. Reasons for this are the interdisciplinary nature of the mediated skills and strong connections to neighbouring interdisciplinary skills such as media literacy. With the UNESCO definition as a base, the Swiss standards were developed using the "Australian and New Zealand Information Literacy Framework" of the Australian and New Zealand Institute for Information Literacy ANZIIL (Bundy 2004) and the internationally established "Information Literacy.
Competency Standards for Higher Education" of the American Association
of College and Research Libraries (ACRL 2000). Studies in recent years have shown that information literacy must be fully understood and not restricted to library tools (Leibniz- Informations-Zentrum Wirtschaft 2011, Madray
2007) . Specifically, the aspects of "Use of Information" and "Responsibility
to Information" have moved to the foreground and won academic importance. Including these aspects in existing concepts of IL was timely and included the development of six standards accordingly. By formulating the new standards, content can be simultaneously adjusted to the culture of the Swiss audience. Considering the three linguistic cultures (German, French, and Italian), the developed concepts were limited to the essentials. Thus, the content for all three cultures remains understandable and experiences wider acceptance and implementation. Standards can be regarded as generally recognised objectives formulated on an abstract level and describing an area of competence in a few words. For teaching purposes, standards must be supplemented by a more detailed description of skills required by specific target groups. With a modular grid that included skills on three levels (beginner, advanced, and expert), the necessary specifications for different environments were realised. The level "Beginners" describes the skills needed for a first-year student, while the level "Advanced" focuses on the skills needed for students in the transition from bachelor to master. The "Expert" level is aimed at students who pursue further scientific work in research or industry. The competency grid is to be used per its modular design; depending on the context, the corresponding requirements may be configured differently and require different prioritisation. The IL requirements for a student of jurisprudence are different from those for a student of electrical engineering. The present Swiss standards for IL at Swiss universities are to be understood as a common basis for recommending and implementing IL into university programs. Subject-specific integration into study programmes and courses is essential for IL's successful placement and promotion. The competency grid is a

Digital Information horizontally and vertically coordinated approach to broad information Literacy literacy objectives. It can be used to develop individual lessons, teaching modules, and performance checks. Each of the six standards includes three to four learning objectives that can be prepared and detailed by the technical requirements of the competency grid. The Competency Grid Guide explains what knowledge is expected at the three levels. A technical adjustment is recommended since no subject-specific features are included in the competency grid. In the information society, IL is regarded as one of the most important skills for success in study and work. To achieve consistency in the impartation and promotion of information literacy at Swiss universities, the "Information Literacy at Swiss Universities" project developed the Swiss Standards of Information Literacy. These six standards were supplemented by related learning objectives (course objectives). Standard One: The information-literate person recognises the need for information and determines the nature and extent of the information needed Need: The information literate person * defines and articulates the information need referring to a defined purpose * understands the purpose, scope, and appropriateness of a variety of information sources * selects and uses diverse sources of information to inform decisions Standard Two: The information-literate person finds needed information effectively and efficiently Retrieval: The information literate person * selects efficient methods or tools for finding information * constructs and implements effective search strategies * obtains information using appropriate methods Standard Three: The information-literate person critically evaluates information and the information-seeking process Assessment: The information-literate person * defines and applies criteria for evaluating information * assesses the usefulness of the information obtained * re-evaluates the nature and extent of the information need * reflects on the information-seeking process and revises search strategies as necessary Standard Four: The information literate person manages and shares information collected or generated
166 Organisation: The information-literate person

* records information selected and its sources Information Literacy * organises, classifies, and stores information using appropriate methods * shares information with others * keeps up to date with information sources, information technologies, and investigative methods Standard Five: The information-literate person applies prior and new information to accomplish a specific purpose Application: The information-literate person * applies new and prior information to the creation of new knowledge or a particular product * communicates the new knowledge or product effectively to others * revises the creation and communication process of knowledge or product Standard Six: The information-literate person acts as a responsible member of the information society Responsibility: The information-literate person * Acknowledges cultural, ethical, and socio-economic issues related to the use of information * Conforms with conventions and etiquette related to the use of information * Legally obtains, stores, and disseminates all kinds of information
9.5.3 The Nine Information Literacy Standards for Student
Learning
From: Information Power: Building Partnerships for Learning By the
American Association of School Librarians and the Association for
Educational Communications Technology.
Information Literacy
Standard 1: The information-literate student accesses information efficiently and effectively. Standard 2: The information-literate student evaluates information critically and competently. Standard 3: The information-literate student uses information accurately and creatively.
Independent Learning
Standard 4: The student who is an independent learner is information literate and pursues information related to personal interests. Standard 5: The student who is an independent learner is information literate and appreciates literature and other creative expressions of information. Standard 6: The student who is an independent learner is information literate and strives for excellence in information seeking and knowledge generation.

Digital Information Social Responsibility
Literacy Standard 7: The student who contributes positively to the learning community and society is information literate and recognises the importance of information to a democratic society. Standard 8: The student who contributes positively to the learning community and society is information literate and practices ethical behaviour regarding information and information technology. Standard 9: The student who contributes positively to the learning community and society is information literate and participates effectively in groups to pursue and generate information.
9.6 LIBRARY'S ROLE IN IL INSTRUCTION
In higher education, library instruction's role is to create lifelong learners, and the path to that goal is through information literacy skills. Two goals of information literacy instruction are to teach students how to learn and how to become independent learners. Librarians have offered many names for library instruction, including bibliographic instruction. In recent years, library instruction has been called "information literacy" instruction. Whatever the name, the core concerns are the access and use of information. Grassian and Kaplowitz report a long list of methods for library instruction in IL including signage, maps, site maps, kiosks, guided tours, self-guided tours, virtual tours, exhibits, flipcharts, blackboards, whiteboards, overhead transparencies, presentation slide shows, slides/tapes and videotapes, point- of-use guides, pathfinders, exercises, computer-assisted instruction, reference questions, individual research consultations, course-integrated or standalone one-shot group sessions, formal courses, discussion boards, chat, e-mail/ listservs, and web pages/sites. A successful library instruction program will incorporate online databases (both OPAC and subscription databases) and the World Wide Web. The goal is to make the students active participants in the library instruction rather than passive listeners. In this regard, the library is a facilitator, enabling the students to foster their information literacy. In turn, information literacy, thus achieved, provides two advantages to the host institution. Subjectively, it promotes a learning-centered environment for the students. Objectively, it provides measurable, quantifiable data for the institution to gauge its goals and meet accreditation criteria. The instructional librarian should use available technology to help students identify search terms. The librarian can ask the students to use the abstracts from the citations to find broader and narrower search terms (and solicit suggestions from the class), then point out how the results differ depending on the search terms entered. The students can be divided into groups and then asked to differentiate between a website and a journal article. Secondly, the librarian can instruct the groups to distinguish between a magazine and scholarly journal articles. Finally, the librarian can assign the students the task of using Library of Congress subject headings to find primary sources on the Web.

In academic libraries, the Information Literacy Competency Standards for Information Literacy Higher Education are the professional standards that guide the practice of information literacy instruction. Developed by the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) in 2000 and endorsed by the American Association for Higher Education (AAHE) and the Council of Independent Colleges, these standards offer guidance to librarians who plan to deliver and assess information literacy instruction to students.
9.7 INFORMATION LITERACY COMPETENCY
STANDARDS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION:
USE OF THE STANDARDS
Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education provide
a framework for assessing the information-literate individual. It also extends the work of the American Association of School Librarians Task Force on Information Literacy Standards, thereby providing higher education an opportunity to articulate its information literacy competencies with those of K-12 so that a continuum of expectations develops for students at all levels. The competencies presented here outline how faculty, librarians and others pinpoint specific indicators that identify a student as information literate. Students will also find the competencies useful because they provide students with a framework for gaining control over how they interact with information in their environment. This will help sensitise them to the need to develop a metacognitive approach to learning, making them conscious of the explicit actions required for gathering, analysing, and using information. All students are expected to demonstrate all the competencies described in this document. Still, not everyone will demonstrate them to the same level of proficiency or at the same speed. Furthermore, some disciplines may emphasise the mastery of competencies at certain points in the process, and therefore, certain competencies would receive greater weight than others in any rubric for measurement. Many competencies are likely to be performed recursively. Each standard's reflective and evaluative aspects will require the student to return to an earlier point in the process, revise the information-seeking approach, and repeat the same steps. To fully implement the standards, an institution should review its mission and educational goals to determine how information literacy would improve learning and enhance its effectiveness. Faculty and staff development is also crucial to facilitating acceptance of the concept.
9.8 INFORMATION LITERACY PRACTICES
ACRL Information Literacy: Standards, Performance Indicators,
Outcomes with Objectives and Practices Old Dominion University
(ODU)
Standards, Performance Indicators, and Outcomes

Digital Information Standard One
Literacy The information-literate student determines the nature and extent of the information needed. Performance Indicators:
1. The information-literate student defines and articulates the need for
information. Outcomes Include: a. Confers with instructors and participates in class discussions, peer workgroups, and electronic discussions to identify a research topic or other information need b. Develop a thesis statement and formulate questions based on the information needed. c. Explores general information sources to increase familiarity with the topic d. Defines or modifies the information needed to achieve a manageable focus e. Identifies key concepts and terms that describe the information need f. Recognises that existing information can be combined with original thought, experimentation, and/or analysis to produce new information
2. The information-literate student identifies various types and formats of
potential sources for information. Outcomes Include: a) Knows how information is formally and informally produced, organised, and disseminated. b) Recognises that knowledge can be organised into disciplines that influence the way information is accessed c) Identifies the value and differences of potential resources in a variety of formats (e.g., multimedia, database, website, data set, audio/visual, book) d) Identifies the purpose and audience of potential resources (e.g., popular vs. scholarly, current vs. historical) e) Differentiates between primary and secondary sources, recognising how their use and importance vary with each discipline f) Realises that information may need to be constructed with raw data from primary sources
3. The information-literate student considers the costs and benefits of
acquiring the needed information. Outcomes Include: a) Determines the availability of needed information and makes decisions on broadening the information-seeking process beyond 170 local resources (e.g., interlibrary loan; using resources at other

locations; obtaining images, videos, text, or sound) Information Literacy b) Considers the feasibility of acquiring a new language or skill (e.g., foreign or discipline-based) to gather needed information and understand its context c) Defines a realistic overall plan and timeline to acquire the needed information
4. The information-literate student re-evaluates the nature and extent of
the information needed. Outcomes Include: a) Review the initial information needed to clarify, revise, or refine the question. b) Describes criteria used to make information decisions and choices
Standard Two
1. The information-literate student accesses needed information
effectively and efficiently. Performance Indicators: a) The information-literate student selects the most appropriate investigative methods or information retrieval systems for accessing the needed information. Outcomes Include: a. Identifies appropriate investigative methods (e.g., laboratory experiment, simulation, fieldwork) b. Investigates the benefits and applicability of various investigative methods c. Investigates the scope, content, and organisation of information retrieval systems d. Selects efficient and effective approaches for accessing the information needed from the investigative method or information retrieval system
2. The information-literate student constructs and implements effectively
designed search strategies. Outcomes Include: a) Develops a research plan appropriate to the investigative method b) Identifies keywords, synonyms and related terms for the information needed c) Selects controlled vocabulary specific to the discipline or information retrieval source d) Constructs a search strategy using appropriate commands for the information retrieval system selected (e.g., Boolean operators, truncation, and proximity for search engines; internal organisers such as indexes for books) e) Implements the search strategy in various information retrieval

Digital Information systems using different user interfaces and search engines with Literacy different command languages, protocols, and search parameters f) Implements the search using investigative protocols appropriate to the discipline
3. The information-literate student retrieves information online or in
person using various methods. Outcomes Include: a. Uses various search systems to retrieve information in a variety of formats b. Uses various classification schemes and other systems (e.g., call number systems or indexes) to locate information resources within the library or to identify specific sites for physical exploration c. Uses specialised online or in-person services available at the institution to retrieve information needed (e.g., interlibrary loan/document delivery, professional associations, institutional research offices, community resources, experts and practitioners) d. Uses surveys, letters, interviews, and other forms of inquiry to retrieve primary information
4. The information-literate student refines the search strategy if
necessary. Outcomes Include: a. Assesses the quantity, quality, and relevance of the search results to determine whether alternative information retrieval systems or investigative methods should be utilised b. Identifies gaps in the information retrieved and determines if the search strategy should be revised c. Repeats the search using the revised strategy as necessary
5. The information-literate student extracts, records, and manages the
information and its sources. Outcomes Include: a. Select among various technologies the most appropriate one for the task of extracting the needed information (e.g., copy/paste software functions, photocopier, scanner, audio/visual equipment, or exploratory instruments) b. Creates a system for organising the information c. Differentiates between the types of sources cited and understands the elements and correct syntax of a citation for a wide range of resources. d. Records all pertinent citation information for future reference e. Uses various technologies to manage the information selected and organised

Standard Three Information
Literacy The information-literate student critically evaluates information and its sources and incorporates selected information into their knowledge base and value system. Performance Indicators:
1. The information-literate student summarises the main ideas to be
extracted from the information gathered. Outcomes Include: a. Reads the text and selects main ideas b. Restates textual concepts in his/her own words and selects data accurately c. Identifies verbatim material that can be then appropriately quoted
2. The information-literate student articulates and applies initial
criteria for evaluating the information and its sources. Outcomes Include: a. Examines and compares information from various sources to evaluate reliability, validity, accuracy, authority, timeliness, and point of view or bias b. Analyses the structure and logic of supporting arguments or methods c. Recognises prejudice, deception, or manipulation d. Recognises the cultural, physical, or other context within which the information was created and understands the impact of context on interpreting the information
3. The information-literate student synthesises the main ideas to
construct new concepts. Outcomes Include: a. Recognises interrelationships among concepts and combines them into potentially useful primary statements with supporting evidence b. Extends initial synthesis, when possible, at a higher level of abstraction to construct new hypotheses that may require additional information c. Utilises computer and other technologies (e.g. spreadsheets, databases, multimedia, and audio or visual equipment) for studying the interaction of ideas and other phenomena
4. The information-literate student compares new knowledge with
prior knowledge to determine the information's value-added, contradictions, or other unique characteristics. Outcomes Include: a. Determines whether information satisfies the research or other information need b. Uses consciously selected criteria to determine whether the

Digital Information information contradicts or verifies information used from other Literacy sources c. Draws conclusions based on information gathered d. Tests theories with discipline-appropriate techniques (e.g., simulators, experiments) e. Determines probable accuracy by questioning the source of the data, the limitations of the information-gathering tools or strategies, and the reasonableness of the conclusions f. Integrates new information with previous information or knowledge g. Selects information that provides evidence for the topic
5. The information-literate student determines whether the new
knowledge impacts the individual's value system and takes steps to reconcile differences. Outcomes Include: a. Investigates differing viewpoints encountered in the literature b. Determines whether to incorporate or reject viewpoints encountered
6. The information-literate student validates understanding and
interpretation of the information through discourse with other individuals, subject-area experts, and/or practitioners. Outcomes Include: a. Participates in classroom and other discussions b. Participates in class-sponsored electronic communication forums designed to encourage discourse on the topic (e.g., e-mail, bulletin boards, chat rooms) c. Seeks expert opinion through a variety of mechanisms (e.g., interviews, e-mail, listservs)
7. The information-literate student determines whether the initial
query should be revised. Outcomes Include: a. Determines if original information need has been satisfied or if additional information is needed b. Review the search strategy and incorporate additional concepts as necessary. c. Review information retrieval sources used and expand to include others as needed.
Standard Four
The information-literate student uses information effectively to accomplish a specific purpose, either individually or as a member of a group. Performance Indicators: The information-literate student applies new and prior information to plan and create a particular product or performance.

Outcomes Include: Information
Literacy a. Organises the content in a manner that supports the purposes and format of the product or performance (e.g. outlines, drafts, storyboards) b. Articulates knowledge and skills from prior experiences to planning and creating the product or performance. c. Integrates the new and prior information, including quotations and paraphrasings, in a manner that supports the purposes of the product or performance d. Manipulates digital text, images, and data, as needed, transferring them from their original locations and formats to a new context The information-literate student revises the development process for the product or performance. Outcomes Include: e. Maintains a journal or log of activities related to the information-seeking, evaluating, and communicating process f. Reflects on past successes, failures, and alternative strategies The information-literate student communicates the product or performance effectively to others. Outcomes Include: g. Chooses a communication medium and format that best supports the purposes of the product or performance and the intended audience h. Uses a range of information technology applications in creating the product or performance i. Incorporates principles of design and communication j. Communicates clearly and with a style that supports the purposes of the intended audience
Standard Five
The information-literate student understands many of the economic, legal, and social issues surrounding the use of information and accesses and uses information ethically and legally. Performance Indicators:
1. The information-literate student understands many ethical, legal
and socio-economic issues surrounding information and information technology. Outcomes Include: a. Identifies and discusses issues related to privacy and security in both the print and electronic environments b. Identifies and discusses issues related to free vs. fee-based access to information. Objectives:

Digital Information 1. Demonstrates an understanding that not all information on the Literacy Web is free, i.e., some Web-based databases require users to pay a fee or to subscribe to retrieve full text or other content.
2. Demonstrates awareness that the library pays for access to
databases, information tools, full-text resources, etc., and may use the Web to deliver them to its clientele.
3. Describes how the terms of subscriptions or licenses may limit
their use to a particular clientele or location.
4. Describes the differences between the results of a search using a
general Web search engine (e.g., Yahoo, Google) and a library- provided tool (e.g., Web-based article index, full-text electronic journal, Web-based library catalogue). c. Identifies and discusses issues related to censorship and freedom of speech d. Demonstrates an understanding of intellectual property, copyright, and fair use of copyrighted material
2. The information-literate student follows laws, regulations,
institutional policies, and etiquette related to accessing and using information resources. Outcomes Include: a. Participates in electronic discussions following accepted practices (e.g. "Netiquette") b. Uses approved passwords and other forms of ID for access to information resources. c. Complies with institutional policies on access to information resources d. Preserves the integrity of information resources, equipment, systems and facilities e. Legally obtains, stores, and disseminates text, data, images, or sounds f. Demonstrates an understanding of what constitutes plagiarism and does not represent work attributable to others as his/her own g. Demonstrates an understanding of institutional policies related to human subjects research
3. The information-literate student acknowledges using information
sources to communicate the product or performance. Outcomes Include: a. Selects an appropriate documentation style and uses it consistently to cite sources Objective:
1. Describes how to use documentation to record bibliographic

information from an item retrieved through research. Information Literacy
2. Identifies citation elements for information sources in different
formats (e.g., book, article, television program, Web page, and interview).
3. Demonstrates an understanding that there are different
documentation styles published or accepted by various groups (1).
4. Demonstrates an understanding that the appropriate
documentation style may vary by discipline (e.g., MLA for
English, University of Chicago for history, APA for
psychology, CBE for biology)
5. Describes when the format of the source cited may dictate a
certain citation style.
6. Uses correctly and consistently the citation style appropriate to a
specific discipline.
7. Locates information about documentation styles in print or
electronically, e.g., through the library's Web site.
8. Recognises that consistency of citation format is important,
especially if a course instructor has not required a particular style b. Posts permission granted notices, as needed, for copyrighted material
9.9 INFORMATION LITERACY RUBRICS
Academic librarians should explore new approaches to the assessment of information literacy skills. Satisfaction surveys and input/output measures must provide librarians with adequate information about what students know and can do. Standardised multiple-choice tests and large-scale performance assessments also fail to provide the data librarians need to improve instruction locally. Librarians, facing accountability issues and wanting to improve student learning, require a new approach to library instruction assessment. Applying rubrics to assess research skills and information literacy efforts is fairly new in academic libraries. A selection of studies has reported using rubrics to assess information literacy components. Rubrics are "descriptive scoring schemes" created by educators to guide the analysis of student work. They are usually employed when educators must judge the quality of performances or constructed-response items and can be used across a broad range of subjects. Haffner writes, "In the educational literature and among the teaching and learning practitioners, the word 'rubric' is understood generally to connote a simple assessment tool that describes levels of performance on a particular task and is used to assess outcomes in a variety of performance-based contexts from kindergarten through college. Rubric assessment may be a good match for library instruction assessment needs. It is well suited to measure student learning outcomes, especially those focusing on higher-level thinking skills. Rubrics can be developed that are 177

Digital Information both general enough to be shared by multiple groups and analytic enough to Literacy apply to specific instructional activities.
9.10 INFORMATION LITERACY CURRICULUM
OUTLINE
Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Evaluate the effectiveness of information literacy rubrics in assessing
students' information literacy competencies.

2. Explain the concept of information literacy practices and provide
examples of how they can be applied in academic and professional contexts.

9.11 LET US USM UP
ISO (International Organization for Standardization) defines a standard as a document that provides requirements, specifications, guidelines or characteristics that can be used consistently to ensure that materials, products,

processes and services fit their purpose. International Standards bring Information Literacy technological, economic and societal benefits. According to The British Standards Institution (BSI), a standard is an agreed way of doing something. It could be about making a product, managing a process, delivering a service or supplying materials - standards can cover a huge range of activities undertaken by organisations and used by their customers. BSI equates standards to the distilled wisdom of people with expertise in their subject matter who know the needs of the organisations they represent. The IL standards take us a step ahead, and we discuss the optimal use of information for enhancing personal and societal productivity and efficiency. Information literacy seeks to provide students with knowledge, access, evaluation, use, and ethics of information sources. The outcomes attached to Literacy Standards are achievable partially by a well-constructed program of library instruction, and the online delivery of resources will play an increasing role in this process. Library instruction alone, however, cannot guarantee information literacy. This goal depends on the cooperation of the parent institution, faculty, library staff, and the individual student. IL models and standards serve as guidelines for developing information literacy curricula and can be used to frame curriculum objectives, learning outcomes, course content, and assessment criteria. If implemented and followed systematically, IL standards can make the students, professionals and citizens at large global citizens who can lead us to an information society as they are equipped with self-confidence, skills, competencies, better decision makers, more aware with clarity of mind.
9.12 KEYWORDS
Information Literacy: Information literacy is the ability to identify, evaluate, and effectively use information from various sources. It involves critical thinking skills to navigate the vast amount of information available, leading to informed decision-making and lifelong learning. IL Standards: Information literacy standards are guidelines that define the skills and competencies individuals should possess to be information literate. They provide a framework for educators to develop curricula and assessment tools, ensuring consistency and quality in information literacy education. IL Models: Information literacy models are theoretical frameworks that describe the process of acquiring and applying information literacy skills. These models may outline sequential steps or emphasise specific aspects of information seeking behaviour, serving as a guide for educators and learners. Swiss Standard: The Swiss Standard refers to a set of guidelines developed by the Swiss Library Association for promoting information literacy. It outlines the core competencies and learning outcomes expected of individuals at different educational levels, serving as a reference for curriculum development and assessment. IL Rubrics: Information literacy rubrics are assessment tools used to evaluate individuals' information literacy skills. They consist of criteria and

Digital Information performance levels for various aspects of information seeking and use, Literacy providing a structured way to measure proficiency and identify areas for improvement.
SCONUL: SCONUL, the Society of College, National, and University
Libraries, is a UK-based organization that promotes collaboration and sharing of best practices among academic libraries. It developed the SCONUL Seven Pillars of Information Literacy, a widely used framework for defining and assessing information literacy skills. IL Curriculum: An information literacy curriculum outlines the content, objectives, and instructional methods for teaching information literacy skills. It may include topics such as search strategies, evaluation of sources, and ethical use of information, tailored to the needs and educational levels of learners. IL Instruction Programme: An information literacy instruction program is a structured series of activities and resources designed to teach information literacy skills. It may consist of workshops, tutorials, online modules, and individual consultations, delivered by librarians, educators, or instructional designers. ACRL Standards: The ACRL (Association of College & Research
Libraries) Standards refer to the Information Literacy Competency Standards
for Higher Education. These standards define the abilities and knowledge required for information literacy in higher education settings, guiding curriculum development and assessment practices.
9.13 FURTHER READINGS
1. American Library Association (ALA). (n.d.). Standards for
information literacy. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency
2. Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (2000).
Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education.
Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved
from https://alair.ala.org/bitstream/handle/11213/7668/ACRL%20Informati on%20Literacy%20Competency%20Standards%20for%20Higher%2 0Education.pdf?sequence=1
3. BSI Group. (n.d.). What is the standard? Retrieved from
http://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/standards/Information-about- standards/what-is-a-standard/
4. Fagerheim, B. A., & Shrode, F. G. (2009). Information literacy
rubrics within the disciplines. Communications in Information Literacy, 3(2), 158-170. Retrieved from https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1188& context=comminfolit
5. ISO. (n.d.). ISO standards. Retrieved from

http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards.htm Information Literacy
6. Oakleaf, M. J. (2006). Assessing information literacy skills: A rubric
approach (Doctoral dissertation, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill). Retrieved from https://cdr.lib.unc.edu/concern/dissertations/kh04dp98r
7. Project "Informationskompetenz an Schweizer Hochschulen". (2011).
Swiss Information Literacy Standards. Retrieved from
https://www.informationskompetenz.ch/doc/e- lib/1_e_swiss%20information%20literacy%20standards.pdf
8. Rockman, I. F. (2003). Integrating information literacy into the
learning outcomes of academic disciplines: A critical 21st-century issue. College & Research Libraries News, 64(9), 612-615. Retrieved from https://crln.acrl.org/index.php/crlnews/article/view/21150/26152
9. Training the Trainers in Information Literacy workshop, 3-5
September 2008. Turkey, Ankara. Dr. Serap Kurbanoglu. Retrieved
from https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10572317.2009.10762
10. University of Tasmania Library. (n.d.). SCONUL seven pillars of
information literacy. Retrieved from http://www.utas.edu.au/library/teach/information-research- skills/sconul-7
9.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Information literacy is the ability to access, evaluate, and utilise
information effectively in various contexts. In higher education, it's crucial for students to develop these skills to conduct research, critically analyse sources, and make informed decisions. It empowers learners to navigate the vast amount of information available, equipping them to succeed academically and professionally.
2. The SCONUL 7 Pillars and UNESCO IL Standard are two prominent
models of information literacy. While both emphasise critical thinking and lifelong learning, they differ in their approach. SCONUL focuses on seven key areas of information literacy development, tailored specifically for higher education, whereas UNESCO provides a broader framework applicable across different educational levels and cultural contexts.
3. Libraries play a vital role in information literacy instruction by providing
access to diverse resources, offering guidance on research strategies, and facilitating workshops and tutorials. They serve as hubs for information discovery, fostering a culture of inquiry and lifelong learning among students.
4. The nine information literacy standards for student learning encompass

Digital Information various competencies, including determining the extent of information Literacy needed, accessing information effectively, evaluating information critically, and using information ethically. These standards serve as benchmarks for assessing students' information literacy skills and guiding instructional practices in higher education settings. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Information literacy rubrics are valuable tools for assessing students'
proficiency in information literacy. They outline specific criteria and performance levels, enabling educators to evaluate students' ability to locate, evaluate, and use information effectively. Rubrics provide transparency and consistency in assessment, guiding students towards achieving higher levels of information literacy competency.
2. Information literacy practices refer to the application of information
literacy skills in real-world scenarios. Examples include critically evaluating sources, synthesising information from multiple perspectives, and effectively communicating findings. These practices are essential for success in academic research, professional endeavours, and lifelong learning.

UNIT 10 APPLICATIONS OF
Applications of
Information Literacy
INFORMATION LITERACY
Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 Information Literacy
10.2.1 Concept
10.2.2 Importance
10.2.3 Application of Information Literacy
10.2.4 Characteristics of an Information Literate Person
10.2.5 Historical Development of Information Literacy
10.2.6 Threshold Concepts
10.2.7 Metaliteracy
10.2.8 Media and Information Literacy
10.2.9 Information Disorder
10.3 Digital Citizenship and Education
10.4 Role of Library Professionals and Teachers
10.5 Let Us Sum Up
10.6 Keywords
10.7 Further Readings
10.8 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
10.0 INTRODUCTION
Information is a vital component required in all activities and operations of different sectors of day-to-day life, education, research, governance, banking, defence, and business, among many others. Information refers to facts, numerical data, and knowledge narrative accounts. It is relevant when the receiver interprets, understands, and implements it. All individuals and organisations need the information to ensure their effectiveness in their work. Further, they need the right information to respond, adjust and adapt to their environment. Information acts as a catalyst in driving change from the present state to the desired state of affairs. It is important to underline that the information should be authentic, reliable, current and appropriate. Users must be competent enough to retrieve the right information from authentic sources. That is why the topic of Information Literacy is important. People must have the requisite skills to locate and retrieve the required information and use it to make informed decisions and choices. If the people have the right information, they may raise their concerns and get them addressed appropriately. These skills, values, and competencies to retrieve the right information to address the need in context are collectively known as information literacy. The information literate

Digital Information people are the individuals who have become conversant in learning; they Literacy have learnt how to learn. The information literacy skills support and nurture the lifelong learning goals of the governments worldwide. In an information society, people have access to information and communication technologies and know how to use the different information resources to accomplish their personal, professional and social goals effectively. The people may obtain information in their preferred format and share it with others as and when they want to. They are well equipped to access, browse, use, create, distribute, disseminate, diffuse, exploit and share information for their personal, economic and cultural activities. An information society uses information communication technologies as an enabler for the overall development of people. Information plays an important role in all the activities of an information society. An information society is one where the creation, generation, distribution, dissemination, use, integration, sharing, adding, and enhancing information is a common and significant activity. The information society aims to use information creatively, meaningfully and productively. In other words, the information society strives to use information for informed decision-making. In today's era, the global dissemination and communication of information happen at an amazing speed due to information communication technologies. Their vast potential and easy availability have caused information deluge or information overload. Information Communication Technologies enable the creation, publication and circulation of content on the Internet.
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Explain the concept and meaning of information literacy; * Understand its importance and trace its development; * Describe the skills of an information-literate person; * Analyse that information literacy and lifelong learning are interlinked; * Understand the meaning of threshold concepts; and * Discuss the different types of information disorders.
10.2 INFORMATION LITERACY
10.2.1 Concept
Information Literacy is the set of integrated abilities covering the reflective discovery of information, how information is produced and valued and the use of information in creating new knowledge and participating ethically in communities of learning and understanding. The Alexandria Proclamation (2005) has defined information literacy as a means to "empower people in all walks of life to seek, evaluate, use and create information effectively to achieve their personal, social, occupational and educational goals". Shapiro and Hughes (1996) emphasised that information literacy education is 184 essential for all citizens to ensure any country's smooth, successful

functioning. They have mentioned seven integral components of information Applications of Information literacy. Literacy Tool literacy is understanding and applying IT tools relevant to education or work. Resource literacy is understanding the different forms, formats, locations, and access methods of relevant information resources. Social literacy: Structural literacy is figuring out how the information is socially situated and produced. Research Literacy: Research Literacy is the ability to use IT-based tools for locating and retrieving information for one's research activities Publishing Literacy is the ability to format, publish, and disseminate research findings to a wide audience through authentic outlets or media. Emerging technology Literacy is the ability to continuously evaluate, understand, adapt, and adopt emerging tools, techniques, and resources for one's work. Critical literacy critically evaluates information technologies' intellectual, human, and social strengths, weaknesses, advantages, and costs. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is Information Literacy?

10.2.2 Importance
The importance of information literacy can be succinctly expressed through the axiom--knowledge is power. This means that your potential or ability to succeed in pursuing your objectives will be enhanced if you know. Information literacy competencies are essential in education and research and for being a lifelong learner. Further, Information literacy skills are required for all children, adolescents, adults, and senior citizens as information is available. Further, people, including students, spend considerable time on the Internet, and there are no intermediaries-teachers or library professionals to guide them through the information deluge of textual, audio and video content. Moreover, in the online environment, people access, consume, generate, disseminate and share information quickly without hesitation or obstruction. 185

Digital Information If users consume wrong information, it becomes the foundation for Literacy synthesising and generating more fraudulent information, which is further shared and triggers more wrong information in circulation. The users are responsible for distinguishing, identifying, filtering, using, and sharing authentic and credible information. The Alexandria Proclamation of 2005 has underscored that information literacy is essential for lifelong learning. Further, information and lifelong learning are the beacons of an information society and accelerate development, prosperity and freedom. Information literacy equips people with competence and instils confidence to seek, locate, evaluate, use and generate information efficiently to achieve their personal, social, occupational and educational goals. It is a basic human right in a digital world and promotes inclusiveness for all nations. Information literacy allows learners to become more informed, prudent and evolved as they continuously learn. When individuals control their learning, they retrieve the required information, implement it, and incorporate it into their existing knowledge base to meet their educational professional or daily goals and aspirations. Citizens, communities, and nations require new skills to browse, access, locate, retrieve, and use information to create new content for further dissemination and reuse. This is done to achieve their social, professional, and educational goals (Forest Woody Horton, 2013). Information literacy also leads to self-empowerment, which entails learning and knowing where to seek help, from whom to ask, and how to quickly and easily search, locate, retrieve, read, understand, and use the right information at the right time to resolve a problem or address a concern. Information literacy involves thinking and evaluating critically. The Prague Declaration describes information literacy as essential for the social, cultural, and economic development of nations, communities, institutions, organisations, and people in the 21st century. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is the importance of Information Literacy?

10.2.3 Application of Information Literacy
Lifelong learning is the broad term for education conducted beyond the formal channels of schools, colleges, and universities. The term is used for

any form of self-taught learning. It is voluntary, not compulsory, completely Applications of Information self-motivated, and has the main purpose of personal or professional Literacy development. The two concepts of information literacy and lifelong learning are interrelated. Both of them are self-motivated and self-directed, and they do not require outside intervention. However, it is important to mention here that the guidance at the initial stage is essential for individuals to pick up skills and implement them. These concepts are self-empowering and help individuals irrespective of caste, colour, creed, gender, religion, ethnic group or geographical location. They are also self-actuating, which means that if a person is information literate, he will be more inclined towards learning. The person will be motivated to learn more and become knowledgeable to make informed decisions. The International Alliance for Information Literacy considers lifelong learning a basic human right and underlines that information literacy skills should be used to ensure that information-literate individuals actively participate and contribute to an information society. The power of information can be harnessed only after evaluating it for its currency, relevance and authenticity. The information evaluation process is a crucial life skill and a basis for lifelong learning. Information Literacy extends skills needed for searching, evaluating and putting information into a specific context. The skills are applied in all walks of life by one and all students, researchers, policymakers and citizens. Students and researchers need information skills to search, discover, locate, evaluate, and use information ethically. Further, people actively use the Internet and social media; they need skills to evaluate the information for currency, authenticity, and reliability before applying it to problem-solving and decision-making. Check Your Progress: 3 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you understand by lifelong learning?

10.2.4 Characteristics of an Information-Literate Person
An information-literate person is capable of recognising when information is needed. The individual can locate, evaluate, retrieve, and use information effectively to fill the gap. Information-literate citizens of any country contribute to enhancing its development indices. This happens because people can make informed decisions and retrieve the right information promptly.

Digital Information An information-literate person can Literacy * Recognise an information need. * Determining the level and range of required information * identify and locate the pertinent sources of information * critically evaluate the quality and authenticity of the source * use technology prudently * use information ethically. * Share and disseminate information by adhering to the principles of integrity. An information literate person is fully aware of all the important scholarly work of his field, builds his work on them, and is conversant in referencing and citation skills. IFLA has established an Information Literacy Section to foster international cooperation in developing information literacy education. UNESCO aims to create information-literate societies by creating and maintaining policies for information literacy. The people do not become information literate because they are unaware of the detrimental effects of information illiteracy.
10.2.5 Historical Development of Information Literacy
Paul G. Zurkowski introduced the term information literacy in 1974. Zurkowski used the term to refer to the techniques and skills people use to retrieve and use information for problem-solving. The term gained momentum as people began understanding the importance of a democratic, productive, and egalitarian society (Sample,2020). Owens (1976) observed, "Information literacy differs from context to context. All men are created equal, but voters with information resources are in a position to make more intelligent decisions than citizens who are information illiterate. The application of information resources to the process of decision-making to fulfil civic responsibilities is a vital necessity." In 1989, ALA formed a national forum on information literacy to spread awareness about its significance for individual communities, enhance governance, and promote democratic values. In 1991, the Second White House Conference on Libraries and Information Services (WHCLIS) focused on Information Literacy. It acknowledged the efforts of Libraries and Information Centres in supporting a literate and democratic society. In 1997, Christine Bruce focused on seven aspects of information literacy: information technology, information sources, information process, information control, information construction, extension, and wisdom. In 1999, Information Skills in Higher Education: A SCONUL Position Paper underscored the seven major components of Information Literacy: Recognising an information need, identifying ways of addressing the 188 information gap, constructing search strategies, locating and accessing

information, comparing and evaluating it, organising, applying, and Applications of Information disseminating, and finally synthesising and creating new content based on it. Literacy In 2000, the ACRL, a division of ALA, launched "Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education." This document describes five standards for implementing Information literacy programmes in higher education. In 2011, the model was revised and expanded to represent more clearly the different aspects of information literacy. The new model was a core model for higher education, and different lenses may be applied. A lens denotes a particular group of learners. In 2011, a research model was introduced with the core model. Learning is an ongoing activity that involves acquiring information, reflecting, engaging, and applying it as the situation or context warrants. Developing an information-literate person entails simultaneous activities or processes within the seven pillars of Information Literacy. Within each pillar, a learner may develop from novice to expert. The model spells out learners' core skills and competencies (ability), attitudes, behaviours, and perceptions in information literacy development in higher education. The model considers that information literacy is not a linear activity. A learner may develop within several pillars simultaneously and independently. The teachers may use the model to impart training in information literacy to the learners. Addison and Meyers (2013) grouped different definitions of IL into three categories: * A set of skills * A way of thinking * A social phenomenon or practice. In the initial phase, the concept of IL was skill-based. Gradually, with the introduction of cognitive models, the definitions focused on IL as a way of thinking. The reference of constructivist theories with critical theory focused on IL as a social practice. The experts felt that the scope of information literacy needed to be broadened to include the concepts of meta-literacy and transliteracy (Mackey & Jacobson, 2011). Metaliteracy is an umbrella term that integrates emerging technologies and covers different literacies, such as digital, media, visual, and information technology fluency. Thomas(2008) defined transliteracy as " the ability to read, write and interact across a range of platforms, tools and media from signing and orality through handwriting, print, TV, radio and film to digital social networks."It stresses the relationship between people and various technologies, especially how people use social media, but it does not focus on particular literacy. It focuses on unifying all literacies required for reading, writing, and interacting with people and technologies.

Digital Information The Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education were Literacy published in 2000, underlining the importance of information literacy in higher education. The Task Force, appointed in 2011 to review the standards, released two drafts of the framework and received feedback and comments from researchers in LIS and other disciplines, higher education associations, accrediting agencies, library associations and consortia. The Task Force recommended that the standards be revised and the scope of information literacy be expanded to include transliteracy, media literacy, digital literacy,
etc. The Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education
were rescinded in 2016 The ACRL Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education (2016) comprises six frames and different threshold concepts important to Information Literacy (ACRL,2016)
The ACRL Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education
underlines that the full potential of Information Literacy will be harnessed if some core concepts or ideas, also known as threshold concepts, are implemented. The framework includes the concepts of knowledge practices and ways to increase their understanding of information literacy, as well as dispositions describing means by which the affective attitudinal or valuing dimensions of learning are assessed. It guides libraries on how to use and implement strategies for enhancing the competencies of the learners. It considers the concept of IL as meta literacy and spells out six threshold concepts which are essential in information literacy, knowledge practices, and dispositions, as given below: * Authority is constructed and contextual. * Information creation is a process. * Information has value * Research is inquiry * Scholarship as conversation * Searching as strategic exploration. Library professionals and faculty may use these frames to design courses, instruction sessions, and assignments that impart education and training in information literacy to students. The administration may encourage faculty and committees related to teaching and learning to use concepts from the framework. The framework extends an understanding of knowledge practices and dispositions that information-literate students should have. It focuses on the important role of collaboration and student participation in knowledge creation and scholarship. The framework serves as a heuristic resource to make visible the processes and practices in knowledge-making that may be tacit or unintelligible to the learners.

10.2.6 Threshold Concepts Applications of
Information Literacy The threshold knowledge or concepts are core concepts in a subject area, which, when understood, completely transform a learner's understanding or perception of the subject. Understanding threshold concepts is crucial for understanding the more advanced concepts of the field. They are like portals or gateways that lead to new knowledge or ways of thinking previously unknown. The threshold concepts are troublesome, transformative, irreversible, integrative and bounded. They involve knowledge that is difficult or complex to understand. Initially, the students find them very challenging to understand and gain proficiency; they must put much effort into understanding them. The threshold concepts are transformative- meaning that once the students understand them, their understanding of the subject changes completely and phenomenally. They are irreversible, meaning that once the students gain a complete understanding or knowledge of the threshold concepts, the knowledge gained cannot be unlearnt. They are also integrative, which means that once the concepts are clear, the different components and connections or relations among them become intelligible and enable the students to understand that the concepts are integrated into a body of knowledge, forming a new knowledge matrix that was previously unclear. The integrated nature of the threshold concepts shows that the difficult concepts are important for gaining command over the subject. If a student does not clearly understand the threshold concepts, these may snowball and create difficulty for the student to understand the subject. The threshold concepts may circumscribe a particular conceptual field and create a specific space of expertise within each field. Check Your Progress: 4 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What are threshold concepts?

10.2.7 Metaliteracy
The evolution of the scope of information literacy has led to the emergence of the term meta literacy, which describes the different literacies or competencies required for people to engage and participate in the information ecosystem and contribute to developing societies and countries. Metaliteracy requires critical thinking and reflection to participate in the online environment as creators, collaborators and disseminators of content. It considers the online or digital ecosystem participants as consumers and generators of new information in collaborative space- in the online milieu, wherein the users collaborate, interact, and coordinate to generate new 191

Digital Information content -textual, audio or video. In other words, meta-literacy considers Literacy information literacy as an overarching set of abilities that enable participants to become users and generators of information in an online environment. It entails cognitive, meta-cognitive, behavioural and affective involvement in the online milieu.
10.2.8 Media and Information Literacy
The Internet and social media have facilitated easy communication and dissemination of information, as well as the sharing of videos and pictures globally in no time, eliminating the barriers of time and geography. However, it has also been observed that they act as a double-edged sword. If genuine or authentic information is disseminated, it may help in judicious and informed decision-making. However, when people share information or forward messages and videos without knowing their integrity or authenticity, it may exacerbate a problematic or sensitive situation or threaten the law and order situation in society. In other words, the rapid circulation and spread of wrong, dubious information, rumours, hate speeches, sinister, malicious images and videos may cause severe harm to individuals, groups, communities, institutions, societies and nations. It is more pertinent to a country like India, with 692 million Internet users, which will go up to 900 million by 2025. Rural India has 351 million active users, while urban India has 341 million (Mint,2022). Further, 66 million kids aged between 5 and 11 also use adults' devices online. The use of social media has been growing by leaps and bounds. The constitution of India guarantees freedom of speech to all its citizens, and social media acts as a platform for people to get information and voice their thoughts, ideas, and views freely. The Indians spend an average of
2.36 hours daily on Social media. There are 534.30m, 503.37m and 491.52m
Indians on WhatsApp, Instagram and Facebook, respectively (Global Statistics,2022) Media and information literacy have relevance for all to understand; what is on social media assimilates, generates content, and shares with others responsibly. It underscores that the pitfalls of social media in the form of misinformation, disinformation and fake news can be combated with MIL competencies. Media and information literacy requires proficiency in identifying, evaluating, and scrutinising the different media types and understanding the content they publish. These competencies enable individuals to create content and be prudent purveyors of information. The whole society -children, teenagers and adults- needs to have media and information literacy competencies. They all need to be prudent consumers of social media content and become responsible producers of their content. The Sustainable Goals(SDGs), seventeen in number, aim to strengthen and include an egalitarian, equitable, and fair society by 2030 by eliminating poverty and inequality. Society must have the right, genuine, and authentic information at the right time to achieve them. MIL refers to the proficiency required to read, write, comprehend, print, non- print, audio, and video content, navigate the Internet and social media platforms and generate one's content responsibly and judiciously for further dissemination and sharing(Das and Tripathi,2022)

Check Your Progress: 5 Applications of
Information Literacy Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is Media and Information Literacy?

10.2.9 Information Disorder
The whole world is connected through the Internet, and access to real-time information should be a boon for humanity and bring desirable and constructive changes. In reality, the information ecosystem is contaminated and is dividing the people instead of connecting and uniting them. This contamination of the information ecosystem is known as information disorder. It refers to developing or creating false information with or without any intention of harming or misleading others. Distorting facts, manipulating information, sharing or forwarding wrong information without understanding its grave repercussions, and reviling others' beliefs, faiths and reputations intentionally or unintentionally all these activities or actions refer to information disorder. There are three categories of information disorder, as listed below. Misinformation is false or wrong information spread without knowledge of its accuracy. The person who circulates the information does not know that it is false. Disinformation is false or wrong information spread deliberately to mislead or harm people. Misinformation is the right information, but it is shared to harm a person's image or reputation. Fake news refers to false balance, false content-text or visuals or images, false context, propaganda, disinformation, news satire, news parody, fabrication, and manipulation. Another characteristic feature of fake news is that it is circulated online. The free flow of ideas and information is a precondition for any society to flourish. This requires the free functioning of media without any fear or intervention; the government provides only the required regulatory framework. Fake news poses a serious challenge to normal functioning as it misleads the public, which consumes information, creates problems for governments, and dents the credibility of media in general. The government has initiated steps to stem fake news and prevent it from affecting the functioning of the media.

Digital Information Check Your Progress: 6
Literacy Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What do you understand about information disorder?

10.3 DIGITAL CITIZENSHIP AND EDUCATION
Digital citizenship alludes to the expertise or aptitude to engage positively, critically and competently in the digital environment; this expertise includes the capability to evaluate, read, assimilate, synthesise, generate, create and disseminate content ethically while respecting the rights of others. The essence of digital citizenship is behaving responsibly and prudently in an online environment. The users' right to social participation in the online environment comes with some responsibility. Individuals' competencies to navigate the online milieu are not automatically acquired. The core competencies must be taught, explained, learned, understood, practised, and implemented. Digital Citizenship education focuses on teaching students to work, live and share in an online environment positively and constructively. In many countries, schools impart digital citizenship education to young children to develop online proficiency and engagement and to educate them about the legal implications of their online behaviour. Digital citizenship education ensures that individuals benefit from the online world without becoming vulnerable to its downsides or detrimental effects. Check Your Progress: 7 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this Unit.
1. What is digital citizenship? Please explain.

10.4 ROLE OF LIBRARY PROFESSIONALS AND
TEACHERS
Teachers are responsible for designing curricula and assignments that foster 194 enhanced engagement with the core ideas about information and scholarship

within their subject areas. Applications of Information Literacy Library professionals are responsible for identifying core ideas within their knowledge domain that can extend students' learning, create a new cohesive curriculum for information literacy, and collaborate more extensively with the faculty. The library professionals should impart education and training to the students on the different aspects of information given below: * Characteristics and importance of information * Different sources of information * Evaluation of sources of information * Various ways of searching and retrieving information * Due attribution to the sources of information Students are more responsible for creating new knowledge, understanding the contours and changing dynamics of the information world, and ethically using information, data, and scholarship. University Grants Commission (UGC), India, has introduced two-credit courses entitled Research and Publication Ethics as part of coursework for Ph.D. students. The theory has theory and practice components. It intends to impart education and training in philosophy and ethics, publication ethics, open-access publishing, publication misconduct, citation databases, and research metrics. The course will provide research scholars with an awareness and understanding of conducting research and disseminating its findings; this course will enhance their information literacy competencies.
10.5 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, you have learnt about the concept and importance of information literacy. People at all levels should have requisite information literacy skills to address their needs through informed decision-making. Information Literacy extends skills needed for searching, evaluating and putting information into a specific context. The skills are applied in all walks of life by one and all students, researchers, policymakers and citizens. Students and researchers need information skills to search, discover, locate, evaluate, and use information ethically. The Unit has also dwelt upon the historical development of the concept of information literacy. The Alexandria Proclamation advocates and supports information literacy for lifelong learning. The two concepts are important for the social inclusion of all nations. The Unit also explained threshold concepts, media and information literacy, digital citizenship, and education.
10.6 KEYWORDS
Information literacy: Information literacy is the ability to find, evaluate, organise, use, and communicate information in all its various formats for decision-making, problem-solving, or the acquisition of knowledge.

Digital Information Digital Information Literacy: Digital Information Literacy is the ability to Literacy access, store, organise, transmit and use digital information for various professional, educational and social activities Metacognition: Metacognition means thinking about one's thinking and examining one's biases and fixed mindset or ideas. It means becoming critically aware of what one thinks. It involves monitoring or observing how one perceives and understands things. It is about understanding oneself as a learner or thinker. Personal beliefs, feelings, and opinions should not govern objective thinking and reasoning. Metacognition is empowering as it provides individuals with insights about their thinking but encourages them to make the required changes in their learning activities. Digital Citizens: Digital Citizens are the people who have the competencies and knowledge to use the Internet and other digital technologies to participate in society and politics effectively and responsibly.
10.7 FURTHER READINGS
1. ACRL. (1989). Presidential Committee on Information Literacy: Final
Report. Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved 15
August, 2022, from https://www.ala.org/acrl/publications/whitepapers/ presidential
2. ACRL. (2000). Information literacy competency standards for higher
education. Retrieved 15 August, 2022, from https://repository. arizona.edu/bitstream/handle/10150/105645/standards.pdf?sequence=1& isAllowed=y
3. ACRL. (2016). Framework for Information Literacy for Higher
Education. Retrieved from https://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ ilframework
4. Bruce, Christine. "The seven faces of information literacy." (1997).
5. Das, Anup Kumar, and Manorama Tripathi. "Strategies for checking
misinformation: An approach from the Global South." IFLA Journal (2022): 03400352221078034.6. Global statistics. (2022). Social media statistics of India 2022. Retrieved
from https://www.theglobalstatistics.com/india-social-media-statistics
7. Mackey, Thomas P., and Trudi E. Jacobson. "Reframing information
literacy as a metaliteracy." College & Research Libraries 72.1 (2011): 62-78.8. Mint. (2022). India to have around 900 million internet users by 2025:
Report. Retrieved from https://www.livemint.com/news/india-to-have- around-900-million-internet-users-by-2025-report-
11659063114684. html
9. Owens, M. (1976). State Government and Libraries. Library Journal, 101
(1 January 1976), 27.10. Sample, Angela. "Historical development of definitions of information

literacy: A literature review of selected resources." The Journal of Applications of Information Academic Librarianship 46.2 (2020): 102116. Literacy
11. SCONUL Advisory Committee on Information Literacy. (1999).
Information skills in higher education: a SCONUL position paper. Prepared by the Information Skills Task Force on behalf of SCONUL. Retrieved 15 August, 2022, from https://www.sconul.ac.uk/sites/ default/files/documents/Seven_pillars2.pdf
12. Shapiro, J. J., & Hughes, S. K. (1996). Information Literacy as a Liberal
Art: Enlightenment Proposals for a New Curriculum. Educom Review, p. 31.13. Thomas, Sue. "Transliteracy and new media." Transdisciplinary Digital
Art. Sound, Vision and the New Screen. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2008.101-109.14. Websites:
* naoc.org/mil-resources/the-alexandria-proclamation-on-information- literacy-and-lifelong-learning-2005/ * https://ar.unesco.org/sites/default/files/praguedeclaration.pdf * https://www.ugc.ac.in/pdfnews/9836633_Research-and-Publication- Ethics.pdf
10.8 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1 Information literacy is recognising the need for information and effectively locating, evaluating, and using the required information. Information is abundant in different formats. Individuals must have the competencies to retrieve and use the right information promptly. A person is called information literate when he has all the required skills to access and use the information. Check Your Progress: 2 Information literacy competencies help users identify the right sources of information, critically evaluate them, retrieve the required information, make informed decisions, and become successful lifelong learners and responsible citizens. The people access knowledge that they need to improve their daily lives and achieve their full potential. Information literacy is crucial in enabling people to deal with the challenge of making good use of information communication technologies. Computers, the Internet, and handheld devices are driving profound changes in how pictures, voice, and information are created, transmitted, accessed, and stored today. Check Your Progress: 3 Lifelong learning is the ongoing, voluntary, self-directed, self-motivated education or pursuit of knowledge to accomplish personal or developmental goals.

Digital Information Check Your Progress: 4
Literacy The threshold concepts are core or basic concepts of a field which must be understood before learning difficult or advanced concepts of a subject area or discipline. Check Your Progress: 5 Media Information Literacy is an umbrella term covering information, media, and digital literacy. It also refers to individuals' competencies for critically evaluating different dimensions of media literacy. Check Your Progress: 6
1. Information disorder refers to sharing false information with or without
the intention of harming others. It involves different types of information, including disinformation and misinformation. Check Your Progress: 7
1. Digital citizenship is the ability or competency to access and use digital
technologies responsibly, reasonably, and safely. Digital citizens have the competencies to use digital technologies and the Internet to engage and participate in society, politics, and the ecosystem around them.

UNIT 11 LEARNING ENVIRONMENT AND
Learning
Environment and
Information
INFORMATION LITERACY
Literacy Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 Online Learning: Concept and Advantages
11.3 Determinants of Online Learning Environment
11.4 Enabling Technologies and Tools for Online Learning
11.5 Information Seeking Behaviour in Online Environment
11.6 Information Literacy and Digital Literacy
11.7 Information Literacy for Researchers
11.8 Importance of Place-Based Library Collections and Services
11.9 Importance of Access-Based Library Services
11.10 Let Us Sum Up
11.11 Keywords
11.12 Further Readings
11.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
11.0 INTRODUCTION
An online learning environment is a virtual platform facilitating learning and teaching through the Internet. It allows students and teachers to interact and engage with each other in digital spaces by using tools such as video conferencing, virtual whiteboards, online assignments and discussion forums. In the online environment, the students may access educational material like lectures, readings, and videos at any time, from anywhere, at their convenience, if they have an Internet connection. The online learning environment is technology-driven. The instructors may create and share course content, provide feedback and communicate with students through various online tools. Self-regulated learning is an essential feature of an online learning environment because it enables the learners to take control of their learning process, adapt to the changing learning contexts and develop the skills and strategies needed to succeed in an increasingly complex and dynamic world. The online learning environment may support traditional academic courses, vocational training, professional development or continuing education. In other words, it supports lifelong learning. The online learning environment extends content flexibility, pace and time, enabling opportunities for collaboration, interactivity, and personalised learning experiences. Further, the emergence of COVID-19, followed by the worldwide lockdown of educational institutions, has experienced a paradigm shift in delivering education and training. E-learning has gained acceptance and popularity and 199

Digital Information has become indispensable. Online learning has various determinants, like the Literacy availability of disruptive technologies and information literacy. In this unit, we will learn about various disruptive technologies and information literacy which facilitate and enhance the online learning experience.
11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the concept and advantages of online learning; * Identify the determinants of the online learning environment; * Evaluate enabling technologies and tools used in online learning; * Analyse information-seeking behaviour in the online environment; and * Develop awareness of information literacy and digital literacy skills necessary for successful participation in online learning.
11.2 ONLINE LEARNING: CONCEPT AND
ADVANTAGES
An online learning environment is a virtual platform where learners and instructors may connect, interact, and communicate over the Internet. It involves using various digital tools, technologies, resources, activities, and good information literacy skills to support and enhance the learning experience. The COVID-19 pandemic forced educational institutions worldwide to rapidly transition to remote teaching and virtual learning to maintain the continuity of education. The sudden shift to online learning has been a significant challenge for many educators as well as learners. Still, it has also led to the adoption of new technologies and teaching practices, which have the potential to transform education forever. Educators have realised the potential of online learning and are exploring new ways of integrating various tools and technologies into their teaching practices. Further, online or virtual learning can expand access to education, particularly in remote and far-flung areas. It may provide learners with flexibility and autonomy in their learning endeavours. The Covid 19 has accelerated the adoption of online learning, which has many advantages, as listed below: Increased access to education: Online learning has the potential to make education accessible to learners who may not have access to traditional in- person learning environments, such as those who live in far-flung areas, have mobility issues and have family obligations. Increased flexibility: Online learning offers greater flexibility in scheduling and pacing, allowing learners to study at their own pace and on their schedule. This is especially helpful for adult learners. Increased use of technology: Online learning has accelerated the use of

technologies in education, such as online platforms, videoconferencing tools, Learning
Environment and
and digital learning resources. These technologies can enhance the learning Information experience and provide new opportunities for collaboration and engagement. Literacy Emphasis on self-directed learning: Online learning entails taking responsibility for one's learning and developing self-regulated learning skills, enabling one to become independent. COVID-19 has significantly impacted virtual learning, accelerated the adoption of new technologies and highlighted disparities in access and equity. While online or virtual learning has provided greater flexibility for learners, it has also presented challenges for instructors, educators, and learners alike as they adapt to the new learning environment.
11.3 DETERMINANTS OF ONLINE LEARNING
ENVIRONMENT
The online learning environment's determinants can impact the learning experience's quality and effectiveness. Some of the key determinants are listed below: Technological Infrastructure: The quality and reliability of technological infrastructure, such as Internet connectivity, hardware, and software, can greatly impact the online learning experience. Course Design and Delivery: The design and delivery of the course content, use of multimedia resources, and interactivity and engagement strategies may affect student motivation, commitment, and learning outcomes. Instructor presence and engagement: The degree of the instructor's engagement and communication with the learners may impact their motivation, engagement, and success. Learner readiness and engagement: Motivation and engagement with the course content affect learning outcomes. Assessment and feedback: The quality and frequency of assessment and feedback certainly influence the learning experience in an online environment. Support services: The availability of support services, such as technical support, academic mentoring, and tutoring, may influence the learning experience in the online environment. Accessibility and inclusiveness: The degree to which the online learning environment is accessible and inclusive to all learners, regardless of their backgrounds, abilities, and needs, can impact the learning outcomes and satisfaction levels of the learners.
11.4 ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS
FOR ONLINE LEARNING
There are several technologies which facilitate an online learning environment. Some of the most common technologies used in the online learning environment are listed below:

Digital Information * Learning Management Systems (LMS): These software platforms help Literacy educators create and deliver courses online. An LMS may include features such as course management, content creation and management, assessment tools, and student tracking; some examples are Moodle, Canvas, and Blackboard. * Video Conferencing software: Platforms like Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and Google Meet enable instructors and learners to participate in live and virtual classroom sessions to conduct meetings and discussions. * Multimedia Content Creation Tools: Instructors should be familiar with Adobe Creative Suite, Canvas, and Prezi to create engaging multimedia content for the programs and courses they teach. * Online Collaboration Tools: Platforms like Dropbox, Google Docs, and Trello facilitate student collaboration. * Virtual and Augmented tools: These tools provide immersive learning experiences, like virtual field trips or simulations, enabling learners to understand complicated concepts and interact with virtual objects. * Social Media: Social media platforms like Twitter, Research Gate, and LinkedIn may be used to connect with learners and instructors to share resources, discussions and expertise. * Mobile Devices and Apps: Mobile devices and apps enable learners to access courses and digital libraries on the go. * Educational Apps: These allow instructors to create quizzes, flashcards, and other interactive activities; some examples are Kahoot, Quizlet, Duolingo, and Mentimeter. Activity- 1
1. Please create a quiz of three questions on Information Literacy by using
Mentimeter, https://www.mentimeter.com/
2. Please create an account in Research Gate https://www.researchgate.
net/login and upload your publications.
11.5 INFORMATION SEEKING BEHAVIOUR IN
ONLINE ENVIRONMENT
The stages of information-seeking behaviour in an online learning environment may be delineated as follows: Initiation: This stage involves recognising a need for information which a given assignment, a query, or a personal interest could trigger. The learners may start by brainstorming potential topics, generating more queries or identifying gaps in their existing knowledge. Exploration: The learners search for information from various sources, such as online databases, library catalogues, search engines, and online discussion forums. They may use keywords, subject headings, and Boolean operators to refine their search results and locate the required and relevant information.

Formulation: The learners plan to find relevant information, including Learning
Environment and
identifying keywords and search terms, deciding on search tools, and Information determining search criteria, such as data range and publication type, etc. The Literacy learners evaluate and analyse the information that they come across and select relevant and credible sources. Executing the search involves searching online databases, search engines and other resources. The learners may modify their search strategies or criteria as they navigate ahead and come across the results. Collection: The learners collect and organise the information they find using note-taking techniques and reference management tools to keep track of their sources. Presentation: The learners read, understand, assimilate, and synthesise the information they have collected and generate their ideas and thoughts as an essay, term paper, or research report. They must also cite their sources in any of the prescribed citation styles. Evaluation: The final stage involves evaluating the effectiveness of the information-seeking process and reflecting on what could be improved for future assignments or projects. The learners may assess the quality and coverage of the resources, the efficiency of the search strategies, and the overall success or quality of their final product--an essay, term paper, or project report. For students or students to show successful information-seeking behaviour in an online learning environment, they should be aware of information sources other than Google and Wikipedia. They should be conversant with academic conventions like peer review systems, scholarly journals, academic databases, and proper search strategies to browse, locate, access and use academic content. Research has shown that using dance search strategies leads to better performance and grades in higher education examinations (Weberetal,2018). The different stages of information-seeking behaviour in an online learning environment may help learners become more effective at browsing, finding, accessing, retrieving, and using information to meet their needs, as well as helping them develop critical thinking and analytical skills. Check Your Progress: 1 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the different stages of information-seeking behaviour in the
online environment?

Digital Information 2. What are the determinants of the online learning environment? Literacy

11.6 INFORMATION LITERACY AND DIGITAL
LITERACY
Information literacy is understanding, identifying, accessing, browsing, locating, evaluating, and using information effectively, efficiently, and ethically. It is particularly important in an online environment because students must know how to navigate and understand the vast amount of online information to succeed and achieve their goals. Good levels of information literacy are crucial in an online learning environment for the following reasons: * Information literacy ensures quality research work: The learners must know how to distinguish between reliable and unreliable sources of information and use the information ethically. * Communicating information: Communication is the essence of any research work. Researchers must know how to communicate their research findings, ideas, and opinions through various scholarly and digital media. Information literacy helps learners communicate precisely and persuasively. * Evaluating information: Information literacy skills help learners analyse, evaluate, read, understand, assimilate, and synthesise information from various sources and generate ideas. Students learn to think critically and make informed decisions to solve real-life problems. * Avoiding plagiarism: Information literacy skills help learners understand the importance of citing sources and avoiding plagiarism. This is especially important in an online learning environment, where copying and pasting information and passing it off as one's own without acknowledging the source is easy. * Lifelong Learning: Information literacy skills are essential for lifelong learning, as they enable learners to continue to learn and adapt to new information throughout their lives. This is particularly true in an online learning environment, where technology and information are dynamic and ever evolving. * Information literacy is crucial for academic success, effective engagement in a digital society and effective information access and use in the workplace. People's competency to locate, assess, and use information in all spheres of their lives is based on their information literacy abilities, including the capacity to conduct information searches

in offline print sources and online databases. Information literate people Learning
Environment and
can distinguish reliable information from false or misleading information Information and are skilled and ethical users. These abilities are essential for both Literacy literacy and overall quality of life. The emphasis has switched from information literacy to digital literacy as the information landscape has changed from one based on paper to one digital. The ability to live, learn, and operate in a digital society is called digital literacy. It also suggests that a person is competent enough to manoeuvre through an online environment. Digital literacy abilities, particularly effective use of digital sources of information, are crucial for success in the workplace and business. They also play a crucial role in students' personal growth and information literacy. * Information literacy is a collective term for a set of literacies related to finding, analysing, absorbing, and sharing information. Digital literacy is the skills needed to use digital resources, such as social media and information and communication technologies, to apply information literacy. Credit information literacy courses may be specially designed to teach students the skills and knowledge required to locate, evaluate, and use information effectively and responsibly. These courses may be offered as part of a university's curriculum at different levels, such as introductory, intermediate or advanced and may have academic credit. The course- integrated information literacy programs or sessions are short, more focused, and incorporated into a specific course or assignment. They are designed to help students develop the information literacy skills required to complete a particular assignment or project successfully. These sessions may be handled by the library staff or faculty teaching the course and may cover topics like search strategies, research methods and citation management. (Karnad,2013) Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Why is information literacy essential for learners in an online
environment?

2. What are the advantages of Information Literacy in the online learning
environment?

Digital Information 3. What is the difference between the credit information literacy course and Literacy course-integrated information literacy sessions?

11.7 INFORMATION LITERACY FOR
RESEARCHERS
Knowledge About the General databases Sources of the Field Subject-specific databases Aggregator and publisher databases Abstract and citation databases E-books E-journals Open Access journals Electronic theses and dissertations
Open Educational Resources
Knowledge about the Library Access and place-based collections and resources and services services Knowledge about how to https://www.edanz.com/journal-selector evaluate and select the right https://journalfinder.elsevier.com/ journal Knowledge about how to Single Window Search access and browse the online Single Sign-on Facility resources
OPAC (Online Public Access Catalogue)
Saving results or bibliographical details from OPAC Knowledge about conducting Using the right keywords -specialised and a search subject terms Simple and Advanced Refining search Using Boolean operators to expand or narrow down results Using Wildcard, * Use of filters and tabs Downloading full texts of journals and e- books Knowledge about Scholarly UGC (Promotion of Academic Integrity and
Communication Prevention of Plagiarism in Higher
Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2018 https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/7771545_a

cademic-integrity-Regulation2018.pdf Learning
Environment and
UGC-CARE Information
https://ugccare.unipune.ac.in/apps1/home/in Literacy dex Difference between legitimate and predatory journals UGC guidance document https://www.ugc.gov.in/e- book/UGC_GARP_2020_Good%20Acade mic%20Research%20Practices.pdf
Impact Factor
H Index
ORCHID
Research Data policies of universities and fund granting bodies Different models of publishing -Gold and Green Author Processing charges Knowledge about the Use of Reference Management tool - referencing Mendeley, Zotero Inserting in-text citations Creating bibliographies by selecting one of 7000+ citation styles.
Installing MS Word Plugin, Web importer
Downloading and saving references Knowledge about the Knowledge about the peer review process different modes of publishing Green, Gold, hybrid publishing Knowledge about DOAJ Knowledge about how to identify credible sources Difference between traditional and digital publishing. Knowledge about Keeping Using blogs, RSS feeds, ResearchGate, up to date using online AcademiaEdu networking sites Knowledge about various Twitter, Instagram, Facebook Snap chat social media and professional LinkedIn networking sites
Social Searcher
Knowledge about project Microsoft Teams: This is part of Office 365. collaboration Users can have all project documents in one place and use it for meetings and chats. Google's G Suite: Users may use various apps to store documents, collaborate, and meet with peers. Zoom or Skype: For team meetings

Digital Information Kanbans: Microsoft planner, part of Office Literacy 365; Trello is freely available online. Selecting the right online tool https://www.moovly.com/ For video creation https://www.dropbox.com/ For storing and sharing files https://www.rememberthemilk.com/ For creating and managing task lists Use ACCEPTS to select the right tool. * Access - how will you access it? Laptop, phone, iPad, etc.? * C Comparisons - are there other similar tools that would do the job better or better? * C Cost--Many tools start free but require payment later or offer a 'lite' version free with a fuller version that you need to pay for. * Ease of use - how long will you spend learning this tool? Will it be intuitive? * P Purpose - how much functionality do you need? * T Trust - does the site look trustworthy? Who put it there? Who is using it? * S Shelf-life: Is it important that it's still there in 3, 6, or 12 months? What would happen if it disappeared? The table above shows the different types of competencies and knowledge the researchers should have to pursue online scholarship. Activity -2 * What is the impact factor of new media on society? Please write down all your steps to locate the information or give screenshots. * How will you determine if New Media and Society is listed in the UGC- CARE List? Please write down all the steps and provide screenshots of what you have followed to locate the information. * Please create an account in ORCID https://info.orcid.org/ and update your profile.
Awareness of Copyright Laws in the Online Learning Environment
Copyright rules are crucial in the online learning environment to ensure that learners and educational institutions behave responsibly and ethically while using copyrighted material or content. Digital technology has facilitated cutting, copying, pasting, and distributing content in the online environment. The learners must understand and abide by copyright laws to enhance their

learning experience and thus support the development of a vibrant and Learning
Environment and
diverse culture of intellectual property. The copyright laws impact the online Information learning in the following manner: Literacy * Copyright laws protect the rights of authors, creators, and owners of original works such as books, articles, videos, and images. Since online learning involves using these materials, it is essential to know the country's copyright laws and obtain permission to use copyright material. * Fair use is a legal doctrine that permits limited use of copyrighted material for teaching, research, and scholarship. It allows instructors and learners to use copyrighted material in their coursework, provided that the use is transformative, non-commercial, and does not infringe the copyright holder's rights. * Universities and libraries have licensing agreements with commercial publishers and content providers that permit instructors and learners to use copyrighted material in their coursework. Instructors and learners must know about and abide by the terms and conditions of the licensing agreements. * It is very easy to systematically download the full texts of journals or share copyrighted material online. However, engaging in digital piracy is unlawful and unethical. Instructors and learners must be aware of the ethical and legal implications of piracy, and digital content must be used to ensure compliance with copyright laws. Activity - 3 Please go to the following link and write what the Act says about the "Fair dealing with any work." https://copyright.gov.in/Documents/Notification/Copyright_Amendme nt_2012.pdf
11.8 IMPORTANCE OF PLACE-BASED
LIBRARY COLLECTIONS AND SERVICES
The libraries offer place-based collections and services which have tremendous importance in an online learning environment Access to physical resources: The physical libraries facilitate access to a range of physical resources like books, journals, magazines, newspapers and other materials. This is helpful for learners who prefer to work with physical resources or who need to access content unavailable online. Access to Technology: The physical libraries provide access to technology, such as computers, printers, scanners, text-to-speech software, Braille embossers, digital voice recorders, and other equipment, which can be particularly helpful for visually impaired online learners who may not have access to these resources at home. Support for research and learning: The physical libraries provide various

Digital Information services to support research and learning, including research assistance, Literacy reference services, and training workshops. These services are very beneficial for online learners who may not have access to on-campus resources or support. Study spaces or collaborative work areas: Libraries provide study spaces and collaborative work areas that online learners can use. These spaces provide focused and quiet areas for academic and research activities and offer opportunities for collaboration and networking with other learners. Community building: Physical libraries provide a sense of community and connection to online learners who may feel disconnected from their peers and instructors. Libraries also host events, exhibitions, workshops, and training sessions that can help foster community and engagement among online learners.
11.9 IMPORTANCE OF ACCESS-BASED
LIBRARY SERVICES
Libraries also extend access-based services, significantly supporting and enhancing the online learning environment. Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC) Libraries extend the facility of OPAC, which may be browsed and accessed to find out the details of the libraries' holdings. Access to a wide range of resources: Online libraries offer access to a wide array of resources, including e-journals, e-books, articles, and multimedia content. They permit students to access content that is not available in their collections. 24/7 availability: Online libraries and digital collections are available 24/7, allowing learners and instructors to access information at their convenience of time and place. The flexibility is particularly useful for students who balance work, family and social obligations. Search tools and databases Online libraries offer powerful search tools and databases that make it easier for learners to search and find the required information quickly and efficiently, saving their precious time. For instance, the libraries offer the capability of single-window search, which helps users search across the various databases' resources, e.g., journals, theses and dissertations, and OPAC simultaneously. Remote Access: Online libraries and digital collections may be accessed remotely through a single sign-on facility; by using a single name and password, the learners may access different library resources whenever they want to, irrespective of time and location. Online support: Libraries also offer online support to learners to help them navigate the collections, find relevant resources, and guide research strategies. This support includes research assistance, reference services, and online tutorials. Customisation and personalisation: Libraries often tailor their collections

and services to the needs of online learners. They provide customised Learning
Environment and
research guides, create subject-specific collections, and host online Information workshops and training sessions. Literacy Virtual Reference Services: Libraries offer virtual reference services to support learners' academic pursuits. By connecting learners with reference staff, libraries provide access to key resources and experts and thus enhance the online learning experience. Collaboration and networking: Libraries extend opportunities for collaboration and networking to online learners through online discussion forums, chat rooms, and social media groups. These resources help learners connect with others with similar learning interests and goals. Activity - 4
1. Give a screenshot of your library's remote access facility.
2. Conduct a search in your library's OPAC for books on open science.
Give its screenshot
11.10 LET US SUM UP
An online learning environment is a virtual platform or space where learners and teachers can connect, interact and learn over the Internet. Various digital tools, resources and activities are designed to support and enhance the learning experience. In an online learning environment, the students may access course materials, participate in discussions, submit assignments, take quizzes and exams and receive feedback from their teachers, all from the comfort of their homes or any location with Internet access. The online learning environment may use various enabling technologies like Learning Management systems (LMS), Virtual classrooms, webinars and social media platforms. The online learning environment facilitates learning from school to higher education levels. The learners should be information literate to succeed and thrive online. Information literacy is essential for success in an online learning environment. It helps learners access, browse, evaluate, and use information effectively, efficiently, and ethically. The unit has also covered some networking tools, although others are out there. The learners may use them to develop and share their expertise and experience, communicate with others and collaborate on projects. The online tools help learners communicate, network, share lists, manage projects, and create and publish content.
11.11 KEYWORDS
Digital Literacy refers to skills, knowledge and attitudes required to access digital information efficiently. Digital literacy includes finding and using information (otherwise known as information literacy). Still, it goes beyond this to encompass communication, collaboration and teamwork, social awareness in the digital environment, understanding e-safety, and creating new information. Both digital and information literacy are underpinned by

Digital Information critical thinking and evaluation. Digital literacy skills empower individuals to Literacy work effectively and safely online, whether at work, studying or home. It defines those capabilities that fit an individual's needs for living, learning, and working in a digital society. Virtual reality (VR) is the use of computer graphics systems in combination with various display and interface devices to provide the effect of immersion in an interactive 3D computer-generated environment. Immersive virtual reality is a technology that allows learners to experience a computer- generated environment as if they were there. It involves wearing a special headset that covers the learners 'eyes and ears and displays the virtual environment in 3D. The impact factor is commonly used to measure the frequency with which an average article in a journal is cited in a year. The document provides a general framework for enhancing research integrity, focusing on potential threats and best practices. It addresses how plagiarism, misrepresentation, and fabrication can be checked. UGC released it in 2020 and may be accessed at https://www.ugc.gov.in/e- book/UGC_GARP_2020_Good%20Academic%20Research%20Practices.pd f. H index: A scientist has an index of h if h A research has an index of H if Np papers have at least h citations each and the other (Np - h) papers have <=h citations each. ORCID, Which stands for Open Researcher and Contributor ID, is a free, unique, persistent identifier (PID) for individuals to use as they engage in research and scholarship. https://info.orcid.org/ A virtual learning environment (VLE) provides rich teaching patterns and teaching content; it helps improve learners' ability to analyse problems and explore new concepts. Integrated with immersive, interactive and imaginational advantages, it builds a shareable virtual learning space which can be accessed by all kinds of learners of the virtual community
11.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Liu, F., & Zhang, Q. (2021). A new reciprocal teaching approach for
information literacy education under the background of big data.
International Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET),
16(3), 246-260. https://www.learntechlib.org/p/219027/article_219027.pdf
2. Hemavathi, B. N., & Ramesha, B. (2021). Information literacy (IL)
model for Indian higher learning environment: A Practical Approach to implementation of IL Instruction Program at University Libraries. Journal of Indian Library Association, 56(4), 146-155. https://www.ilaindia.net/jila/index.php/jila/article/viewFile/418/233
3. Rader, H. B. (2020). CONFERENCE CIRCUIT: New learning
environments: The importance of information literacy in academia.

College & Research Libraries News, 59(7), 509-511. https://crln.acrl. Learning
Environment and
org/index.php/crlnews/article/view/23704/31073 Information Literacy
4. Shi, Y., Peng, F., & Sun, F. (2022). A blended learning model based on
smart learning environment to improve college students' information literacy. IEEE Access, 10, 89485-89498. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ stamp/ stamp.jsp?arnumber=9864590
5. Weber, H., Becker, D., & Hillmert, S. (2019). Information-seeking
behaviour and academic success in higher education: Which search strategies matter for grade differences among university students, and how does this relevance differ by field of study? Higher Education, 77, 657-678.11.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. In the online environment, information-seeking behaviour typically
progresses through several stages. Firstly, there's the recognition of a need for information, often sparked by curiosity or a specific task. This leads to the search stage, where individuals utilize search engines, databases, or social media platforms to find relevant information. Following this is the evaluation stage, where the credibility, relevance, and reliability of sources are assessed. Subsequently, there's the decision- making stage, where individuals choose which information to engage with or incorporate into their knowledge. Finally, there's the utilization stage, where the acquired information is applied to fulfil the initial need or task. These stages may not always occur linearly, as individuals might revisit previous stages based on new information or changing needs, showcasing the dynamic nature of information-seeking behaviour in the online realm.
2. The online learning environment is influenced by various determinants
that shape its effectiveness and functionality. Technological infrastructure plays a crucial role, encompassing aspects such as internet connectivity, device accessibility, and software compatibility. Pedagogical design and instructional strategies are equally significant, impacting how content is delivered and engaged with by learners. Moreover, the socio-cultural context, including factors like language diversity and cultural sensitivities, influences the inclusivity and relevance of online learning experiences. Learner characteristics, such as motivation, prior knowledge, and digital literacy skills, also contribute to the success of online learning endeavours. Additionally, institutional support, including administrative policies, technical support services, and faculty development initiatives, significantly influence the quality and sustainability of the online learning environment. Understanding and addressing these determinants are essential for creating enriching and equitable online learning experiences.

Digital Information Check Your Progress: 2
Literacy
1. In an online environment, information literacy becomes paramount due
to the vastness and accessibility of digital information. Firstly, it enables learners to discern credible sources amidst the abundance of information available online. This skill ensures the accuracy and reliability of their research, fostering academic integrity. Secondly, information literacy equips learners with the ability to effectively navigate digital platforms and databases, optimizing their learning experience. Moreover, it cultivates critical thinking skills, enabling students to evaluate, analyse, and synthesize information effectively. In essence, information literacy in an online setting empowers learners to become discerning consumers and creators of digital content, enhancing their academic pursuits and preparing them for the demands of the digital age.
2. Information literacy confers numerous advantages in the online learning
environment. Firstly, it empowers learners to effectively locate, evaluate, and utilize digital resources, enriching their educational experience. By honing their ability to discern credible sources amidst the vast expanse of online information, students cultivate critical thinking skills and ensure the integrity of their research. Furthermore, information literacy equips learners with the tools to navigate digital platforms and databases proficiently, facilitating seamless access to educational materials. Additionally, it fosters digital citizenship by promoting responsible and ethical use of online resources. Ultimately, information literacy enhances students' ability to engage with course content, collaborate effectively in virtual environments, and adapt to the evolving landscape of online education.
3. The primary distinction between a credit information literacy course and
course-integrated information literacy sessions lies in their scope and delivery. A credit information literacy course typically constitutes a standalone, comprehensive program offered for academic credit. It covers a broad range of topics, including information retrieval, evaluation, citation, and ethical use of sources. Such courses often provide in-depth instruction, assignments, and assessments to ensure students develop robust information literacy skills. On the other hand, course-integrated information literacy sessions are designed to complement specific courses within the curriculum. These sessions are often shorter in duration and focus on integrating information literacy skills directly into course content. Faculty members collaborate with librarians or information literacy specialists to tailor sessions to the specific learning objectives of their courses. Course-integrated sessions may include workshops, tutorials, or assignments that reinforce information literacy concepts within the context of the course material. Overall, while both approaches aim to enhance students' information literacy skills, they differ in their level of comprehensiveness and integration within the academic curriculum.

UNIT 12 DIGITAL INFORMATION
Digital Information
Processing
PROCESSING
Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 Digital Information
12.3 Digital Information Processing
12.4 Storing of Digital Information
12.5 Online Databases
12.6 Media and Information Literacy
12.6.1 Social Media
12.7 Artificial Intelligence
12.8 Creative Commons
12.9 Let Us Sum Up
12.10 Keywords
12.11 Further Readings
12.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
12.0 INTRODUCTION
In today's world, information plays a crucial role in our daily lives. Regardless of our field or social status, we rely on information for our functioning and survival. Access to information has become the norm, especially for students and researchers, as it is essential for their academic and research endeavours. In the digital era, an abundance of information is growing rapidly. The ease of creating and sharing information digitally has further contributed to this growth. With the widespread use of social media, everyone must verify information before sharing it or making decisions based on it. Furthermore, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has gained popularity across various sectors, including education, research, industry, and healthcare. Researchers should be aware of AI tools that can enhance their educational and research activities. Access to the right information at the right time aligns with Sustainable Development Goal 4 (SDG4) - Access to Quality Education. Achieving this goal requires easy access to quality information. Research scholars must also understand different licenses when using and generating information online. In this unit, you will learn about digital information, its characteristics, how people process digital information, licenses and different AI tools that can be helpful for your academic and research purposes.

Digital Information 12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
Literacy After reading this unit, you should be able to * Explain the concept of information and its characteristics; * Understand the concept of digital information processing; * Understand the importance of Information Literacy; * Know about the importance of Media Information Literacy; * Understand the various types of licenses of Creative Commons; and * Know about various AI-based tools.
12.2 DIGITAL INFORMATION
Information encompasses facts and opinions gathered in daily life. It is acquired from interactions with others, mass media, social media, and observations of the environment. Individuals use this information to generate further insights, which they may communicate to others through conversations, instructions, written correspondence, and various media. Digital information refers to data stored, transmitted, and processed digitally, typically using computers or other digital devices. This includes text, images, audio, video, and other types of data that have been converted into binary code (0s and 1s) for computer processing. Digital information can be easily copied, shared, and manipulated, making it a versatile and important part of modern communication and technology. Digital information is characterised by its binary representation, where data is stored and processed as sequences of 0s and 1s. This form allows for discrete values, enabling each unit of digital information to represent a specific value. It is easily reproducible without losing quality, making it simple to share and distribute. Its ease of manipulation means digital content can be edited, analysed, and transformed with digital devices and software. It is also efficiently stored, as digital devices can store large amounts of data in a small physical space. Furthermore, digital information can be easily transmitted over digital networks, such as the Internet, facilitating fast and efficient global communication over long distances. Its versatility allows it to represent a wide range of data types, including text, images, audio, video, and more, enabling the creation of multimedia content and interactive digital experiences. Digital information can be easily shared, copied, edited, and moved without losing quality. Copies retain the same quality as the original, ensuring no loss of information provided that the file is not compressed, corrupted, or inaccessible due to hardware or software-related issues. Access to digital information is independent of its physical storage location. Data can be stored in the cloud or on remote servers, allowing for remote access and use. Digital information can be aggregated, linked, and searched. Dashboards can aggregate and integrate information for reporting purposes. New information can be generated by combining data streams, enabling new types of analytics.

It can be updated in real time. Dashboards provide direct access to summary Digital Information Processing information. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is Digital Information?

12.3 DIGITAL INFORMATION PROCESSING
Digital information processing involves manipulating digitised data using computers and other digital electronic devices, collectively known as information technology (IT). Information processing systems encompass application software, operating systems, computers, networks, and mainframes. This process is called information processing whenever data needs to be transferred or manipulated. Computers process information to generate understandable outcomes, including acquiring, recording, organising, retrieving, or distributing information. For instance, when printing a text file, an information processor translates and formats digital data into a printed format. Information processing encompasses acquiring, recording, organising, retrieving, displaying, and disseminating information. It also refers to how individuals retrieve, assimilate, understand, record, store, and act on information to generate more knowledge. This process influences the motivation and behaviour of individuals, which in turn impacts society as a whole. The actions and behaviour of individuals play a significant role in shaping and influencing broader societal trends and developments. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is Digital Information Processing?

217

Digital Information 12.4 STORING OF DIGITAL INFORMATION
Literacy Storing and recording human knowledge began over 5000 years ago with the emergence of recording media and techniques. The Library of Alexandria, established in the 3rd century BC, contained papyri detailing citizens' property and the taxes they paid. The invention of the printing press in the 17th century accelerated the growth of the printing and publishing industry. Since then, literature, or written text, has been the primary medium for disseminating knowledge. The term "literature" encompasses various formats such as newspapers, monographs, conference and seminar proceedings, scholarly journals, reports, theses, and dissertations. The first scholarly journal, Journal des Savants, was published in 1665. Currently, more than 46,736 journals are published worldwide. The vast amount of published information exceeds what any researcher can read, understand, and assimilate. To aid researchers in locating relevant information, tools like table of contents, summaries, bibliographies, and indexing services have been developed, known as secondary periodicals.
12.5 ONLINE DATABASES
Digital technologies have revolutionised how information is recorded, stored, and retrieved. Developments in computer storage, telecommunications, computer networking, and automated indexing and searching have accelerated the growth of online databases. These technologies have also enabled the development of online public access catalogues (OPACs), union catalogues, and consortia. Online databases store digital information in a relational structure. Users can browse and search databases using keywords and filters through a user-friendly interface. Hypertext and hypermedia links are available to navigate the databases. When a query is entered, the information is searched, and the results are displayed as a list with hyperlinks. The screenshot of the IGNOU Library is given below.

The screenshot given below shows how filters and advanced search may be Digital Information Processing used to retrieve the required information.
12.6 MEDIA AND INFORMATION LITERACY
There are more than 1.2 billion Internet users in India, and this is likely to grow to 1.6 billion by 2050. In 2022, there were 399 million Internet users in rural India, while 360 million were there in urban India. India has more than 497 million Facebook users, growing to 970 million by 2040. Further, 362 million Instagram users and 535.8 million active WhatsApp users will increase to 795.67 by 2025 and 26 million X/Twitter users in the country(Statista, n.d.). Further, a survey has highlighted that 60% of children in India in the age bracket of 9 to 17 spend over three hours daily on social media and gaming(TNN,2023). Media and Information Literacy (MIL) is relevant for all. It helps people understand, assimilate, further synthesise, generate, and share their content responsibly. MIL skills can mitigate the negative effects of social media, such as false information, misinformation, and fake news. Being media and information literate is knowing how to recognise, assess, and examine various media platforms and the information they broadcast. These competencies allow people to be responsible information providers and content creators. Social media's broad usage allows information to reach millions of people instantly. While accurate and positive information can be helpful, maliciously disseminated false information can also have negative impacts, putting law and order in jeopardy and causing social unrest. Many people can be tricked by propaganda and fake news since social media companies find it difficult to filter out false information. Teenagers' personalities are greatly shaped by media, which also has an impact on their socio-emotional, psychological, cognitive, moral, and physical development. Media projections frequently serve as the source of

Digital Information their notions of bravery, beauty, prosperity, and prestige. Since students are Literacy always plugged into a global online ecosystem, it is essential to give them the tools they need to succeed in this setting. As a result, it is of the utmost importance to encourage critical engagement with media information through Media Information Literacy (MIL). To ensure children use social media judiciously, they must be proficient in deciphering, evaluating, and utilising Media Information Literacy, which involves accessing, analysing, and creating content from various texts. During the pandemic, there was a considerable amount of misinformation circulating. X/Twitter has responded by implementing labels and warning messages to alert users to the accuracy of the content. Studies have shown that misinformation spreads rapidly on social media, particularly affecting public health and social harmony. Users should be cautious when sharing content on Twitter, avoiding disseminating manipulated or suspicious material on WhatsApp and Facebook. Accountability for online posts remains challenging despite Facebook's efforts to identify and remove false advertising, such as homoeopathic remedies claiming to prevent or cure diseases. Instagram, owned by Facebook, has also identified hashtags commonly used in posts containing false or misleading information. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is Media and Information Literacy?

2. How do media influence adolescents?

12.6.1 Social Media
On social media, information processing is a multifaceted process that begins with users creating and sharing diverse content, such as text, images, videos, and links. This content is then distributed to users' networks through algorithms considering factors like relevance and engagement. User interactions, including likes, comments, shares, and reactions, provide feedback that influences content visibility. Platforms collect user interactions, demographics, and behaviour data to personalise content and advertisements. This data is analysed to gain insights into user preferences and trends, which inform content curation and platform improvements. Algorithms process user

data and content to personalise the user experience, recommend content, and Digital Information Processing target advertisements. Platforms use feedback from user interactions and data analysis to refine algorithms, improve content curation, and enhance user engagement. Privacy and security concerns related to user data, including data breaches and privacy policies, are also managed by social media platforms. Overall, information processing on social media is a dynamic process that aims to enhance user engagement and platform performance through content creation, distribution, user interaction, data collection, analysis, algorithmic processing, and feedback mechanisms. Misinformation on social media spreads easily due to the platform's inherent characteristics, such as the ability to share content with a wide audience quickly. Algorithms that prioritise engagement can inadvertently promote sensational or false information. Additionally, users often form echo chambers, interacting primarily with like-minded individuals, which can amplify misinformation within specific communities. The lack of robust fact- checking mechanisms and the ease of creating fake accounts or using bots further spread false information. This is exacerbated by confirmation bias, where individuals are more likely to accept and share information that aligns with their existing beliefs. While social media companies are taking steps to address this issue, including fact-checking partnerships and content moderation, combating misinformation remains a significant challenge in the digital age. Meta has employed 15,000 content reviewers for Facebook, Instagram, and threads, covering over 70 languages, including 20 Indian languages. It has initiated fact-checking programs to combat misinformation. Meta has collaborated with the Election Commission of India, allowing the commission to flag illegal content. It has enlisted experts from various fields, such as intelligence, data science, engineering, research operations, content policy, and law, to detect potential threats. It removes content that could incite violence or disrupt social harmony. Meta conducted an eight-week- long safety campaign called "Know What's Real" to educate users on identifying misinformation on WhatsApp and Instagram. The campaign promoted the best digital practices and highlighted the available safety tools. Users can double-check information by sending it to WhatsApp tip lines. Meta has also joined the Misinformation Combat Alliance (MCA) and introduced a WhatsApp helpline to combat AI-generated misinformation. WhatsApp has limited users' ability to forward messages to multiple groups simultaneously. It has implemented Community Standards and Guidelines that dictate permissible content on Facebook and Instagram. Content that does not comply with these guidelines is removed. Meta also labels photorealistic content generated using AI tools. At the Munich Security Conference (MSC) in February 2024, the twenty leading technology companies committed to mitigate deceptive AI content that could harm people during the general elections in 40 countries, where more than 4 billion people will cast their votes. The Tech Accord to Combat Deceptive Use of AI in the 2024 Elections is a set of commitments to implement technology solutions to counter harmful AI-generated content to mislead voters worldwide.

Digital Information 12.7 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Literacy Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become ubiquitous in our daily lives. Whether we're searching online databases for scholarly content or shopping on platforms like Amazon or Myntra, AI systems recommend articles or products based on our search or shopping history. These examples illustrate how AI is now a global driver of change, impacting businesses, societies, and governance. Computers able to solve problems through reasoning, learning, and incorporating various human functions and activities are poised to bring about the next industrial revolution, akin to the transformational impact of the steam engine and electricity. Artificial Intelligence (AI) will serve as a catalyst, permeating all sectors of society. Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) is a type of AI that can create new content, such as stories, images, videos, and music, using machine learning algorithms. These algorithms learn patterns from existing data and then generate new data similar but not identical to the training data. Some of the examples of emerging Generative AI Technologies have been tabulated below.
Tool Type of Data Type of results
ChatGPT, Replika, Textual Provide answers to
Sudowrite, Writesonic questions according to the training data DALL-E,DALL- Text and images Generate realistic E2,Imagen images based on text input
Co-Pilot, DeepCode, Software Generate codes
Intellicode, Code Programmes according to the text Whisperer input Kar et al. (2023) have extensively reviewed generative AI technologies. Estimates suggest that AI will contribute around $1.5 trillion to India's GDP by 2030. AI is catalysing inclusive development, breaking traditional barriers, and driving large-scale social transformation by providing services to everyone, regardless of geographical or socio-economic constraints. The National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence in India focuses on leveraging AI for economic growth, social development, and inclusive growth. The strategy aims to position India as a leader in AI, emphasising the concept of "AI for All" to ensure that the technology benefits the country's unique needs and aspirations. Key sectors targeted for AI implementation include healthcare, agriculture, education, smart cities and infrastructure, and smart mobility and transportation. The strategy emphasises the transformative potential of AI and the need for balanced adoption strategies that consider both financial impact and societal benefits.

Some initiatives leveraging AI are tabulated below. Digital Information Processing
Name Scope Department
UMANG(Unified Mobile To provide a one- Ministry of Application for New-age stop window to Electronics and Governance access all Information https://web.umang.gov.in/ government Technology services from (MeitY) and Central to local National e- government Governance bodies Division (NeGD)
Digiyatra Facial Ministry of Civil
https://www.india.gov.in/spot recognition-based Aviation light/digi-yatra boarding system for Indian airports
Bhashini Speech-to-speech Ministry of
https://bhashini.gov.in/ machine Electronics and translation Information systems enable Technology people to access
the Internet in
their vernacular languages.
ATMAN AI(Ai Based Detecting Ministry of
Intelligent Covid 19 Detector COVID-19 by Defence
Technology For Medical analysing the Assistance) chest X-rays. https://www.drdo.gov.in/drdo /ai-based-intelligent-covid- 19-detector-technology- medical-assistance-atman
CottonAce This is to National
https://www.wadhwaniai.org/ eliminate Pink Entrepreneurship programs/pest-management/ and American Network (NEN) ballworm and preserve cotton cultivation. Shiksha Setu For recording the Assam digital attendance Government of teachers and students. The Ministry of Electronics and IT has published a compendium of 75 success stories to elaborate on the use of AI in delivering services and governance to the people. Generative AI may play a significant role in the digital transformation of society and governance. Ensuring the FATE principles (Fairness, Accountability, Transparency, and

Digital Information Ethics is very important, so the government has implemented many rules. Literacy
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media
Ethics Code) Rules, 2021
The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media
Ethics Code)
Rules 2021, amended in 2022 and 2023, have laid down rules and obligations for the platforms or intermediaries to follow. The platforms or intermediaries are supposed to prevent the dissemination of misinformation and not publish any content which may disturb or violate the law and order situation in the country or violate copyright. Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (DPDP Act) The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (DPDP Act) is a law in India that governs how digital personal data can be used. It aims to balance people's right to protect their data with the need to use it legally.
India AI
MEITY has launched the "India AI" program to consolidate various national initiatives and foster innovation in Artificial Intelligence (AI) in India.
MEITY is implementing the National Program on Artificial Intelligence
(NPAI) as part of this program. MEITY has also asked the Ministry of Skills Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) to create a plan for skill development in AI in India. There are many tools of AI which help the researcher in their academic and research endeavours. Some of them are listed below:
Sl. Name Website Function
No.
1. Semantic Scholar https://www.semantics Provides access to
cholar.org more than 200 million full-text academic papers
2. Site https://scite.ai/ It checks manuscripts
for quality references.
3. OpenAI Codex https://openai.com It translates natural
language commands into code.
4. Jenni https://jenni.ai It helps in writing,
editing and generating citations.
5. Write full https://www.writefull. It revises paraphrases
com/ and corrects the language.
6. Abstract Generator https://x.writefull.com It prepares the
/ abstract for the full

manuscript. Digital Information Processing
7. CORD 19 https://github.com/alle It is a corpus of
(COVID-19 Open nai/cord19 academic papers Research Dataset) about COVID-19 and related coronavirus research. The
Semantic Scholar
team at the Allen
Institute for AI
curates and maintains it to support text mining and NLP research.
8. Scholarly https://www.scholarcy It summarises the full
.com/ text, including methodology, findings, etc.
9. Paper Digest https://www.paperdige It helps in preparing
st.org/ reviews.
10. Semrush https://www.semrush. It generates
com/ summaries.
11. Resoomer https://resoomer.com It highlights the key
concepts of the full texts
12. Summariser https://www.summariz It summarises the full
er.org/ texts.
13. TLDRthis https://www.tldrthis.c It summarises
om/ information.
14. IRIS.ai https://iris.ai/ It searches, prepares
summaries and extracts data.
15. Consensus https://consensus.app/ It makes expert
knowledge accessible and consumable to all.
16. Elicit https://elicit.com/ It summarises papers,
extracts data and gives findings.
17. Scispace https://typeset.io/ It explains academic
texts in simple words.
18. Grammarly https://www.grammarl It reviews spelling,
y.com/ grammar, punctuation, clarity, engagement, and delivery mistakes in English texts, detects

Digital Information plagiarism, and Literacy suggests corrections and substitutes for the mistakes.
19. Quillbot https://quillbot.com/ It paraphrases, checks
grammar and plagiarism, generates citations
20. CURIE https://www.aje.com/c It provides
urie/ suggestions, improves writing structure, enhances flow, and generates citations.
21. Rayyan https://www.rayyan.ai/ It helps organise and
manage systematic literature reviews.
22. Research Rabbit https://www.researchr It helps researchers
abbit.ai/ discover relevant academic papers and articles by allowing users to search for research papers, articles, and other academic content across various disciplines.
23. Journal https://journal- It helps in finding the
Recommender recommender.sagepub right journal of Sage .com/ for publishing the manuscript.
24. Journal Finder https://journalfinder.el It recommends the
sevier.com/ Elsevier journals that match the scope of the manuscript.
25. Journal Suggester https://authorservices.t It recommends the
aylorandfrancis.com/ Taylor and Francis journals that match the scope of the manuscript.
26. Journal Finder https://journalfinder.w It recommends the
iley.com/ Wiley journals that match the scope of the manuscript.

Limitations of Artificial Intelligence Digital Information
Processing Artificial intelligence (AI)has some downsides and challenges. One of the main concerns is the shift of jobs because AI can replace some human labour, leading to unemployment and economic disruption in some sectors. Another problem is the bias in AI systems, which can reflect and perpetuate social biases in the data used to train them. AI also raises ethical concerns, such as breach of privacy and the possibility of abuse, including surveillance and autonomous weapons. In addition, there are concerns about the impact of AI on human decision-making processes, as the dependence on AI can sometimes reduce critical thinking and creativity. Finally, AI has a broader social impact, including problems relating to the distribution of benefits and risks and its effects on social interactions and standards. AI technology requires careful consideration and regulations to address these shortcomings. Deep fakes are synthetic media, typically video or audio, that have been altered using deep learning techniques to depict a person saying or doing something that never occurred. These alterations are often highly realistic and can be difficult to detect with the naked eye or ear. They are created using artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms that analyse and manipulate existing images, videos, or audio recordings to superimpose someone's likeness onto another person's body or to change their voice. While they can be used for harmless entertainment, such as creating videos of famous people singing different songs, they also raise significant concerns about misinformation, identity theft, and privacy, as they can be used to create convincing but entirely fabricated content that appears genuine.
12.8 CREATIVE COMMONS
Creative Commons is a not-for-profit organisation that provides Creative Commons (CC) licenses and public domain tools to individuals and organisations to grant copyright permissions for creative and academic works. These licenses ensure proper attribution and enable others to copy, distribute, and utilise these works.
1. CC BY is a Creative Commons license that allows users to distribute,
remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format for any purpose, even commercially, as long as they give credit to the creator.
2. CC BY-SA
Users can share and adapt the material for commercial purposes. The licensor cannot revoke these rights as long as the users follow the license terms, which include giving appropriate credit, providing a link to the license, and indicating if changes were made. If the user remixes, transforms or builds upon the material, they must distribute their contributions under the same license as the original.
3. CC BY-NC
The users are free to share and adapt the material in any way as long as they give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if

Digital Information changes were made. However, the users cannot use the material for Literacy commercial purposes. Further, they may not add any further restrictions beyond what the license allows.
4. CC BY-NC-SA
CC BY-NC-SA is a Creative Commons license that allows others to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format, but only for non-commercial purposes. Attribution to the creator is required. If you remix, adapt, or build upon the material, you must license the modified material under identical terms.
5. CC BY-ND
This license enables users to copy and distribute the content in any medium or format in an unchanged form while giving attribution to the creator. It also permits commercial use.
6. CC BY NC ND
This license enables users to copy and distribute the content in any medium or format in an unchanged form for non-commercial purposes while giving attribution to the creator.
7. CC0(CC Zero)
It is a public dedication tool that enables creators to give up their copyright and put their work in the public domain. Users are free to distribute, remix, adapt, and build upon the material in any medium or format without any terms or conditions. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the different types of licenses?

The Creative Commons License Chooser helps creators to select the right Creative Commons license for their work. It provides a simple interface where users can choose the permissions they want to grant -whether others can use the work commercially or create derivative works and the conditions they want to apply (such as requiring attribution). Based on these selections, the License Chooser generates the appropriate license text, which can then be added to the creator's work to communicate the permissions granted to others. The screenshot of the License chooser is given below.

Processing Source: https://chooser-beta.creativecommons.org/
Implications for Researchers
With the rapid emergence of AI-based tools, researchers need to upskill and reskill themselves to leverage these tools for their academic and research needs. Researchers must be competent in using ever-evolving technologies to conduct effective research, learn, problem-solve, and critically analyse data. They should be able to locate, evaluate, organise, and implement relevant information from various print and electronic resources, choosing the right tool from a spectrum of available options. Information literacy programs are of tremendous importance for quality research, teaching, and learning. Researchers must be well-versed in accessing and critically using information and IT tools for their academic and research endeavours. Researchers may be considered well-educated if they are information literate. They should be well aware of the information sources in their field and familiar with all components of the Research Publication Ethics (RPE) course. This 2-credit course was introduced by the UGC in 2019 to make researchers aware of the rules and regulations of scholarly communication and to ensure strict adherence to them. Individuals are considered information literate if they can identify an information need and have the expertise to browse, locate, evaluate, and retrieve relevant information. In other words, an information-literate person has learned how to learn. Digital Literacy skills prepare individuals for independent learning, decision- making, and navigating an online environment. Digital literacy includes finding and using information (otherwise known as information literacy). Still, it goes beyond this to encompass communication, collaboration and teamwork, social awareness in the digital environment, understanding e-safety, and creating new information. Both digital and information literacy are underpinned by critical thinking and evaluation. Digital literacy skills empower people to work effectively and safely online, whether at work, studying or home.

Digital Information Exploring your information landscape Literacy Knowledge About General databases
the Sources of the
Subject-specific databases Field Aggregator and publisher databases Abstract and citation databases E-books E-journals Open Access journals Electronic theses and dissertations
Open Educational Resources
Knowledge about the Access and place-based collections and services Library resources and services Knowledge about The integrity of content and authenticity of sources how to evaluate and select the right sources
Knowledge about Single Window Search
how to access and
Single Sign-on Facility
browse the online
OPAC
resources Saving results or bibliographical details from OPAC Knowledge about Using the right keywords -specialised and subject conducting a search terms Simple and Refining search Advanced Using Boolean operators to expand or narrow down results
Using Wildcard,?,*
Use of filters and tabs Downloading full texts of journals and e-books Knowledge about UGC (Promotion of Academic Integrity and
Scholarly Prevention of Plagiarism in Higher Educational
Communication Institutions) Regulations, 2018 https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/7771545_academic- integrity-Regulation2018.pdf
UGC-CARE
https://ugccare.unipune.ac.in/apps1/home/index Identifying the right journal for disseminating research findings

Knowledge about the Use of Reference Management tool -Mendeley, Processing referencing Zotero Inserting in-text citations Creating bibliographies by selecting one of 7000+ citation styles.
Installing MS Word Plugin, Web importer
Downloading and saving references Knowledge about Turnitin, Drillbit, authenticate how to use Anti- plagiarism tools Knowledge about Using blogs, Email alerts, RSS feeds, ResearchGate, Keeping up-to-date AcademiaEdu using online networking sites Knowledge about Twitter, Instagram, Facebook Snap chat various social media LinkedIn and professional
Social Searcher
networking sites Knowledge about Microsoft Teams: This is part of Office 365. Users project collaboration can have all project documents in one place and use it for meetings and chats. Google's G Suite: Users may use various apps to store documents, collaborate, and meet with peers. Zoom or Skype: For team meetings Kanbans: Microsoft planner, part of Office 365; * Trello is freely available online. Selecting the right https://www.moovly.com/ For video creation online tool https://www.dropbox.com/ For storing and sharing files https://www.rememberthemilk.com/ For creating and managing task lists Use ACCEPTS to select the right tool. * Access - how will you access it? Laptop, phone, iPad, etc.? * C Comparisons - are there other similar tools that would do the job better or better? * C Cost--Many tools start free but require payment later or offer a 'lite' version free with a fuller version that you need to pay for. * Ease of use - how long will you spend learning

Digital Information this tool? Will it be intuitive? * P Purpose - how Literacy much functionality do you need? * T Trust - does the site look trustworthy? Who put it there? Who is using it? * S Shelf-life: Is it important that it's still there in 3, 6, or 12 months? What would happen if it disappeared? Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the importance of information literacy?

2. What are the characteristics of an information-literate person?

12.9 LET US SUM UP
Digital Information Processing has revolutionised how information is acquired, stored, retrieved, and disseminated. In an era dominated by digital technologies, information processing is crucial in various fields, including education, business, healthcare, and entertainment. This process involves the technical aspects of handling digital data and encompasses how individuals interact with and use this information. Understanding digital information processing is essential for navigating the complexities of the digital age and harnessing its potential for innovation and advancement. In this unit, you have learned about digital information, its characteristics, and the importance of information literacy programs, including media and information literacy, types of licenses, and various AI tools available for educational purposes. It is also important to understand the government's policies to control and combat the circulation of misinformation on social media. The unit has provided an overview of the various policies formulated by the government to address misinformation and deep fakes and to alert internet users.
12.10 KEYWORDS
Artificial Intelligence: The ability of computers to simulate human behaviour and intelligence. Machine Learning: Algorithms and statistical models are designed to learn from data, enabling computers to recognise and infer patterns within the data.

This allows computers to perform specific tasks without requiring Digital Information Processing instructions from a human operator. Media Information Literacy (MIL) encompasses skills and competencies required to read, write, comprehend, print, non-print, audio, and video content, navigate the Internet and social media platforms and generate one's content responsibly and judiciously for further dissemination and sharing. In modern information ecosystems, citizens should be well- trained to process the news that reaches them. It includes how they take, process, and respond to it.
12.11 FURTHER READINGS
1. Slamecka, V. (2024). Information processing. In Encyclopaedia
Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/technology/information- processing
2. Statista. (2024). Internet market. https://www.statista.com/markets/
424/internet/
3. The Times of India. (2023). 60% of children spend 3 hours a day on
social media: Study. http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/
103878956. cms?utm_source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm
_campaign=cppst
12.12 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Digital information is data available in a digital format, allowing it to be
processed and stored using computers or other digital devices. It can include text, images, audio, video, and different data types. Digital information is characterised by its binary representation, with data being stored and processed as sequences of 0s and 1s. It can be easily copied, shared, and manipulated, making it a fundamental component of modern technology and communication. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Digital Information processing encompasses acquiring, recording,
organising, retrieving, displaying, and disseminating information. It also refers to how individuals retrieve, assimilate, understand, record, store, and act on information to generate more knowledge. This process influences the motivation and behaviour of individuals, which in turn impacts society as a whole. The actions and behaviour of individuals play a significant role in shaping and influencing broader societal trends and developments. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Media and information literacy (MIL) is the ability to access, analyse,
evaluate, and create various forms of media and information. It

Digital Information encompasses the skills needed to understand media messages, assess Literacy information sources critically, and use media and information effectively and responsibly. It enables individuals to become informed and engaged citizens, capable of interacting with media and information thoughtfully and ethically.
2. Media can influence adolescents in various ways, primarily through
social influence, body image, violence, sexuality, consumerism, and education. Firstly, media can shape adolescents' perceptions of social norms, values, and behaviours, leading them to imitate what they see impacting their attitudes and actions. Secondly, media portrayals of idealised body types can contribute to body image issues, such as low self-esteem and unhealthy behaviours like disordered eating. Thirdly, exposure to media violence can desensitise adolescents to real-life violence and increase aggressive behaviour. Further, media messages often promote consumerism and materialism, influencing adolescents' purchasing habits and priorities. Media may also provide information and education to adolescents by extending access to various topics and perspectives. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Please visit https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/
Websites: * Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. (2021).
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media
Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (updated 06.04.2023). https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Information%20Technol ogy%20%28Intermediary%20Guidelines%20and%20Digital%20Med ia%20Ethics%20Code%29%20Rules%2C%202021%20%28updated %2006.04.2023%29-.pdf * Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. (2023). Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Digital%20Personal%20 Data%20Protection%20Act%202023.pdf * University Grants Commission. (n.d.). Report on NPAI Skilling Framework. https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/5732498_Report-on- NPAI-Skilling-Framework.pdf

Processing Block
PARTICIPATION IN INTERACTIVE MEDIA
UNIT 13
Participation in Media Systems
UNIT 14
Political Participation and Digital Media
UNIT 15
Film Genres and Storytelling
UNIT 13
Advertising Literacy

D igital Information Literacy

BLOCK 4 INTRODUCTION
Digital Information
Processing In the previous Blocks, we discussed the nature of media, how to access media and information, and the ability to critically understand media content. Let's move on to the last and most important dimension of media literacy-- engaging with the media. Participating in the communication system and, more importantly, participating with a purpose are the core focal points of this Block. We contextualise this Block from the individual's abilities and opportunities in the contemporary digital environment.
Unit 13: Participation in Media Systems. In this Unit, we explore the
fusion of media and information systems in the modern 'Information society,' where information is both currency and culture. From the traditional mediums of films, television, and newspapers to the expansive realms of social media and the Internet, we dissect how these platforms shape our understanding of the world and facilitate the exchange of ideas. We investigate the evolving role of audiences, transitioning from passive consumers to active participants, and the emergence of prosumers and participatory cultures. Focusing on citizen journalism, we analyse the various forms of participatory culture and media while examining the ethical responsibilities inherent in our interactions with social media.
Unit 14 Political Participation and Digital Media. This Unit explores the
fusion of political participation and digital media. In this Unit, you will understand the diverse avenues through which citizens engage in political discourse, both online and offline. We'll dissect the dimensions of political participation, from traditional forms to the dynamic landscape of online activism. By examining digital media tools, we'll uncover how platforms like social media and online petitions empower individuals to shape political agendas and mobilise communities. Additionally, we'll analyse the evolving role of the digital public sphere in fostering political debates and influencing public opinion. Throughout our exploration, we'll emphasise the importance of media and information literacy as a prerequisite for meaningful political participation in the digital age.
Unit 15: Film Genres and Storytelling. In this Unit, we explore the
captivating realm of cinema, dissecting its structure, grammar, and storytelling techniques. From the evolution of visual entertainment to the modern-day influence of social media, we unravel the intricacies of film production and its impact on audience expectations. Through an in-depth analysis of various genres and their stereotypes, we decipher the codes and conventions that shape cinematic narratives. Furthermore, you will understand the art of scriptwriting and storyboarding, equipping you with the tools to craft compelling visual stories. Whether you're an aspiring filmmaker, a passionate cinephile, or simply curious about the magic of cinema, this Unit offers a comprehensive understanding of film as both an art form and a medium of communication.
Unit 16: Advertising Literacy. Advertising, a cornerstone of commercial
communication, promotes products, services, and societal messages. Despite

D igital Information criticisms of time and resource consumption, understanding advertising's Literacy intricacies is essential for aspiring professionals. Throughout this Unit, we explore its evolution, objectives, advantages, and limitations, spanning various media channels from print to online platforms. We dissect advertising techniques, appeals, and communication processes, equipping you with critical analysis skills. Embracing advertising literacy, we decode complex messages, fostering a deeper appreciation for their societal impact. By integrating previous coursework insights, you'll navigate the advertising landscape adeptly and confidently, planning and evaluating strategies. Media literacy's ultimate goal is to make any individual a responsible citizen and enable them to engage with other institutions to better democratic systems. This course will give you a holistic understanding of media literacy and empower you individually.

UNIT 13 PARTICIPATION IN MEDIA
Media and
Information
SYSTEMS
Systems Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 Changing Profile of Audience
13.2.1 Active and Passive Audience
13.2.2 Changing Role of Audience in New Media Landscape
13.3 Prosumers and Participatory Culture
13.3.1 Understanding Participatory Systems
13.3.2 Characteristics of Prosumers
13.4 Participatory Options of Users
13.4.1 Forms of Participatory Culture
13.4.2 Types of Participatory Media (Citizen Journalism)
13.5 Citizen Journalism and Empowered Audience/Users
13.6 Audience and Their Changing Relationship with Media
13.6.1 Social Media as a Site for Citizen Journalism
13.6.2 Understanding Social Media Rights and Ethics
13.6.3 Social Media Ethics
13.7 Let Us Sum Up
13.8 Keywords
13.9 Further Readings
13.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
13.0 INTRODUCTION
An 'Information society' is one in which information creation, distribution, diffusion, use, and manipulation is a significant economic, political and cultural activity (Webster, 1995). The processes and systems that combine media and information-gathering mechanisms for collecting and disseminating information and ideas are known as media and information systems. On the one hand, we have media such as films, television, newspapers and books to gain information about the world. On the other hand, we have social media and the Internet to disseminate our ideas, exchange our thoughts, and comment on relevant issues. These, along with companies, institutions and organisations engaged in manufacturing, transmitting and exchanging information in all forms (cartoons, videos, printed word, pictures, PowerPoint slides, audio, etc.), comprise our media and information systems.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: 239

Participation in * Understand how audience roles have evolved in media and information
Interactive Media
systems; * Describe the characteristics of prosumers and participatory culture; * Identify different forms of participatory media, such as citizen journalism; * Analyse the changing relationship between audiences and media, focusing on social media ethics; and * Summarise key concepts related to participation in media and information systems.
13.2 CHANGING PROFILE OF AUDIENCE
Media and information systems play a vital role in this networked society. They are crucial agents for making sense of one's environment, seeking desired information and facilitating complete participation in activities around ourselves. Social media platforms have recently emerged as a base for obtaining and sharing most of our information. Not only is new media changing the way we interact with our surroundings, but it is also dictating 'how' we do it. It facilitates sharing in several ways, including text, video, pictures, graphs, illustrations, audio, etc., asking users to engage with the online content more deeply and uniquely.
13.2.1 Active and Passive Audience
Once defined as unidirectional or passive receivers of media messages, the audience/user has become an active media content producer. Schafer (2010) mentions that media and information manufacturing industries have now provided new options to enhance the participation of users taking on the role of 'extended cultural industries'. However, this participation may be explicit or implicit. While an implicit participant merely uses sites for leisure and work, the explicit participant forms a community to co-create content (Schafer, 2010, as cited in Pistone, pg. 16). This means they are actively producing content by either creating or forwarding information. A passive audience receives media messages and gets affected by them but does not react to the content in any way. On the other hand, an active audience constantly revisits media content to make new meanings, point out contradictions, express dissent or disagreement, and provide feedback to media content creators. The media content creation and delivery process has become instantaneous, and so can provide feedback. Thus, even users who do not maintain social media pages or are not frequent users of new media interact with content by providing feedback through opinion polls, voting for their favourite reality show contestants, etc.
13.2.2 Changing Role of Audience in New Media Landscape
The traditional media brought an organised gatekeeping and editorial process that demarcated news, opinion, and editorial. With the advent of new media, traditional media began to be considered anti-democratic and non- participatory. This new media offers interactivity, decentralisation, ubiquity,

media convergence, and non-linear representation of information in a non- Participation in
Media and
hierarchical manner. Information Systems Though the new media did a good job widening the public sphere and enabling readers to engage with and comment upon information and news coming their way, they have failed miserably in ensuring information's accuracy, credibility, and authenticity. The direction of communication has changed from top-down to both horizontal and vertical. Avenues for individual expression co-exist with space for social representation. This new space is more democratic and is believed to enhance participation from all sectors of society. The content generated by users pushes them from the traditional domain of consumer to 'prosumer' (producer + consumer), where they are generating and consuming information at the same time. They are individuals simultaneously involved in both producing and consuming information and media. Prosumers can now locate, dissect, associate, replicate, co-produce and share media and information with the sender and among themselves. The consumer must be able to make sense of all this information and the pitfalls of online communication. As more citizens come online and rely on social media for news, it becomes imperative to equip them with the skills to become digital natives. They need skills to deal with demassification, glocalization, hyperreality, fake news, propaganda, misinformation, and post- truth.
13.3 PROSUMERS AND PARTICIPATORY
CULTURE
Ideas about the consumer becoming a producer due to the coming of electric technology were first put forward by Marshall McLuhan and Nevitt (1972). However, Alvin Toffler coined the word 'prosumer' in his seminal work 'The Third Wave'. The posts, pictures, texts, videos and information put up by users on the Internet are known as User Generated Content (UGC). The coming of Web 2.0 added functionalities for the users and created avenues for participation, and a new 'participatory culture' has emerged. Jenkins et al. (2009) state that " a participatory culture is emerging as the culture absorbs and responds to the explosion of new media technologies that make it possible for average consumers to archive, annotate, appropriate and re- circulate media content in powerful new ways" (pg. 8). Participatory culture is the one that encourages all members of society to engage with the media in ways that are comfortable for them. Few barriers exist to artistic expression and civic engagement in a participatory culture. Users are encouraged to share their creations and collaborate with other individuals. The common examples of such a space are sites such as Facebook, YouTube, etc. (and other social networking sites) that rely upon users to create and share information. The creator of Facebook controls the flow, not the content. Wikipedia is another such site where all of the data is created and modified by readers. E-commerce sites rely upon users to sell and buy products.

Participation in 13.3.1 Understanding Participatory Systems
Interactive Media
However, the participatory system has a few characteristics that set it apart from traditional top-down 'culture industries' (Huybrechts, 2014). * Both makers and participants work with different disciplines, consciously exiting their comfort zone. * This may not necessarily be true for products made by 'culture industries' because they work in a set paradigm with fixed conventions and rules oriented towards 'mass culture' instead of the 'demassification' that the produsers strive to obtain. * Makers are consciously handing over part of the control, as their ideas can be discussed, adapted and even changed by participants. * The produsers know their content could be replicated as memes, mash-ups, or other forms. However, they are open to experimentation and ideas even if they radically alter the original product. This differs from traditional media, where all information is presented through a structured, rigid, and hierarchical protocol. * The project is open to a larger group of potential participants, and the best way to address and involve this audience in the process has not been known from the beginning. * Participatory projects are developed within a network and thus have to deal with the expectations and opinions of several subjects. * There is no clear separation between makers and participants, as they are all actors in the same process.
13.3.2 Characteristics of Prosumers
As more and more prosumers create content, the old structures of content creation are being challenged continuously. Content, like other things, has moved on from customization to co-creation. Axel Bruns defines this "collaborative and continuous building and extending of existing content in pursuit of further improvement" as 'produsage' (2006; 2008). Tapscott and Williams (2006) use the term "prosumption" (production/consumption) to describe the activities of prosumers. Some characteristics are unique to presumption (Pistone, pg 8).
1) Dominance of User-led content production
With the enhanced capabilities offered by new media, there has been a rapid increase in the number of websites allowing products (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, etc.). There has also been an increase in collaboration-friendly sites such as wikis and games such as Second Life that permit building upon the original structures.
2) Collaborative engagement
Even new cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin work on a collaboration model where each participant has significant and unique contributions to

make. Users are encouraged to share real-time information and use open- Participation in
Media and
source software. Information Systems
3) Palimpsest development
The stories on new media come through with instant updates, allowing users to build a timeline and see the content being developed, modified and represented. This feature is special because, in traditional media, one can only see the story's final form delivered to us. A prosumer is thus more engaged and invested in the information process.
4) Alternative approaches to intellectual property
With new media's expanding and pervading nature, sustaining and ensuring the protection of Copyrights and royalties became difficult. Thus, new types of licences, such as Creative Commons, were created to democratise the new space while simultaneously creating a system to acknowledge the contributions of prosumers.
5) Heterarchical structure
Prosumers across the spectrum are given equal value and importance regardless of the actual worth of their contributions. This system ensures that all contributors are simultaneously leaders and participants. Activity - 1 Find out and list any four projects/websites that are collaborative/ participatory. List the licences available with Creative Commons. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is participatory culture, and what are its characteristics?

2. What are the characteristics of presumption?

13.4 PARTICIPATORY OPTIONS OF USERS
13.4.1 Forms of Participatory Culture
There are many ways in which prosumers can participate as citizens. All prosumers have opportunities to participate in citizen engagement, production of media and creating 'culture' (Schafer, 2010). Jenkins et al.

Participation in mention the following forms of participatory culture:-
Interactive Media
* Affiliations -- formal and informal memberships in online communities centred around various forms of media, such as Friendster, Facebook, message boards, metagaming, game clans, or MySpace). * Expressions -- producing new creative forms, such as digital sampling, skinning and modding, fan video making, fan fiction writing, zines, and mash-ups). * Collaborative Problem-solving -- working in formal and informal teams to complete tasks and develop new knowledge (such as through Wikipedia, alternative reality gaming, and spoiling). * Circulations -- Shaping media flow (such as podcasting and blogging). (as cited in Jenkins et al., pg. 3) Participatory culture has significant ramifications for a democratic society. Over the past few years, there has been a significant rise in participatory or citizen journalism.
13.4.2 Types of Participatory Media (Citizen Journalism)
Bowman & Willis (2003) define participatory journalism as the act of a citizen, or group of citizens, playing an active role in collecting, reporting, analysing and disseminating news and information. This participation intends to provide independent, reliable, accurate, wide-ranging and relevant information that a democracy requires (pg 9). Brown mentions (1997), "In an era when anyone can be a reporter or commentator on the Web, 'you move to a two-way journalism.' The journalist becomes a 'forum leader' or a mediator rather than simply a teacher or lecturer. The audience becomes not consumers, but 'prosumers,' a hybrid of consumer and producer." Participatory journalism happens when any ordinary person, as a citizen of a nation, takes the initiative to express ideas irrespective of his educational or professional background. It is an act of citizens actively collecting, reporting, analysing, and disseminating news and information. Lasica (2003) has specified many types of participatory journalism:-
1. Audience participation (such as user comments attached to news stories,
personal blogs, photographs or video footage captured from personal mobile cameras, or local news written by community residents). E.g.:- ohmynews.com, CGNet Swara, Gramvaani and the hyper-local newspaper Khabar Lahariya
2. Independent news and information Websites (altnews.in, wikileaks.com)
3. Full-fledged participatory news sites (Citizen Matters, 'Fair Observer')
4. Collaborative and contributory media sites (Slashdot, Merinews,
Youthkiawaaz, Newsvine)
5. Other kinds of "thin media" (mailing lists, email newsletters)
6. Personal broadcasting sites (video broadcast sites such as KenRadio)

Activity - 2
Media and
Information Identify presumption activities you do during the day and list them with Systems the type. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the different forms of participatory culture?

2. Explain various types of participatory media.

3. What is citizen journalism?

13.5 CITIZEN JOURNALISM AND EMPOWERED
AUDIENCE/USER
The enhancement in technology has facilitated citizens to speak their minds even when traditional media outlets do not support their narratives by giving time to their issues/stories. They use social media to communicate their views and facts using simple technology such as cell phones. Videos/photographs and tweets from citizens have become primetime news topics. This is especially prevalent in remote areas or strife-torn regions that are inaccessible for long periods. The news content is predominantly urban-centric. With the increasing alienation citizens face, they have resorted to using social media to broadcast their views or facts that have been reported otherwise. Mainstream media outlets also rely upon these to compensate for the lack of time, resources, and logistics to cover the last mile in reporting. Though readers earlier interacted with media through avenues such as Letter to the Editor, those letters were more reactive rather than participative. Today, videos and posts from readers/viewers form the basis of editorial decisions about coverage and airtime. Viewers are quick to refute any false claims and point out misreporting. So, the 'watchdog' of democracy now has a 'watchdog' for itself. Many features set participatory media apart from mainstream media. While mainstream media has a typical, hierarchical, gatekeeping model for 245

Participation in selection, editing and publishing stories, participatory media does not have
Interactive Media
any such structure for gatekeeping. Citizen journalism is carried out by untrained participants who may or may not be educated or technically sound, while media persons are often trained in camera, recording, editing, etc. A regular media outlet publishes/ airs only the final version and selected story, thereby not giving information regarding all issues received by the organisation/media outlet and no justification for rejection/omission of certain issues. In participatory journalism, the stories are put in the public domain, where other members annotate, edit, build upon and share stories. The members do not need to choose or omit any stories as they do not have professional constraints. Media relies upon the packaging of news using videos/pictures/audio and infographics. In contrast, news posted by citizens is raw. It allows users to participate in its production through commentaries, annotations, filtering and editing, fact-checking, grassroots reporting, peer-review and open-source reporting and broadcasting their version of events through tweets, audio and video. Since media outlets work under many constraints, they deal with issues of accessibility and other limitations (e.g.:- inability to contact local authorities and verify claims) at the site of stories (Eg:-floods, riots, etc.) and paucity of resources for coverage such as opposed to the citizen journalist who reports from grassroots as he/she has access to the site of the incident in a much better way. They use any/all technologies present to air the news and reduce the time and complexity of the news presented, as it does not need to go through traditional gatekeeping. The resulting news is not very structured and polished but is 'straight from ground zero'. Mainstream media outlets have started recognizing the power of citizen journalism and the challenges it poses. Participatory media has brought about deeper democratisation of media, so much so that it is loosely referred to as the 'fifth' pillar of democracy (the fourth being mainstream media). The hegemony of mainstream media is now facing a real challenge. News organisations must now be serious about upholding values such as accuracy, credibility, and story sourcing. The agendas earlier set by mainstream media are now challenged, and members of the public question expert opinions. The skills of journalists need to be sharper and flexible enough to adjust to this new type of participatory journalism ecosystem. Mainstream media must maintain its presence and popularity in real and virtual worlds while remaining competitive, profitable and adaptive. Activity - 3 Mention four examples of citizen journalism that have created a difference in society. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How has citizen journalism impacted traditional media?

Media and
Information Systems

13.6 AUDIENCE AND THEIR CHANGING
RELATIONSHIP WITH MEDIA
13.6.1 Social Media as a Site for Citizen Journalism
In the initial years of news in India, mainstream news outlets were the source of information for social media and other online news portals. However, with technological advancements, social media is fed stories as they are broadcast and even before broadcast most of the time. Breaking news has shifted from TV to the online domain due to the participatory nature of the Internet. Often, unverified stories go viral on social media, resulting in them being picked up by mainstream news outlets. Sometimes, these go on air without going through the traditional newsroom grind. This can be attributed to several factors, such as the absence of the traditional gate-keeping model in the news coming out of social media, the tendency to share information without fact- checking and the lack of responsibility regarding accuracy from the end of readers and content creators. Fake news, misinformation and propaganda are an even bigger threat in this day and age. Misleading videos going viral have resulted in brutal mob lynching incidents and have caused communal flare-ups needlessly. In the year 2018, over 12 people died in mob lynching incidents after they were falsely accused of being child lifters, sexual offenders and cow slaughterers on social media. In November 2016, WhatsApp messages regarding salt shortage triggered a four-fold price rise and panic buying, leading to chaos and looting of grocery shops. Videos of two Bangladeshi men being assaulted were re-circulated on Facebook in an entirely new context as the video of a Hindu being killed by Muslims (Sharma, 2018). The accompanying text was false, misleading and directed towards inciting violence. Many such texts have been circulated recently. Children as young as eight have become victims of deadly suicide games such as the 'Blue whale'. Challenge videos that ask viewers to pull off stunts or do the impossible keep surfacing regularly (Ice bucket challenge, #kikichallenge). Suicides and murders have been live-streamed on Facebook. The danger of breach of privacy and sharing of our private data by social media companies has presented itself many times, as in the case of the recent Cambridge Analytica- Facebook scandal. Facebook was accused of sharing the private data of its members with Cambridge Analytica without obtaining their consent. The companies often dictate the terms of service and privacy policies per their requirement, and readers have little or no say in changing them. They are also unaware of their virtual identities and how data mining

Participation in firms use them.
Interactive Media
Similarly, other social networking sites often collect and share information with third-party users. However, we cannot control this since failure to accept these policies often results in the inability to sign up or access these sites and applications. Thus, we reveal much more about ourselves online than planned simply because we do not care to go through the privacy settings or disclosure agreements when downloading apps or accessing social media. The least users can do is read and understand these carefully, limiting the amount and type of personal information they upload. The increasing cyber disinhibition, or the loosening of social restrictions and inhibitions in the virtual world, is a major cause of ethical and legal violations. The government has stepped in and is trying to bring accountability by making social media platforms share the responsibility for content posted on them. They are also mulling a Data Protection law that empowers citizens to have complete control over the data they post. This results from unfettered participation opportunities that social media offers its prosumers. However, as the space becomes more and more open for all, the onus of protecting oneself from online crimes while fully participating in the information society also falls upon the prosumer. Much content is being created online, and it is important that the Internet remains open and transparent and protects the rights of individuals contributing to sharing and exchanging knowledge. This allows them to create content freely and fosters creativity while making knowledge accessible to everyone. The temptation to copy or modify easily available content is difficult to fight. Ownership, privacy, confidentiality, and intellectual property must be respected in virtual life, just like in real life. Collaborative websites such as Wikis and YouTube and social media sites such as Facebook, MySpace, Weibo, and Twitter all run with the help of user-generated content. Individuals who read the content also share, exchange, add, and publish the data they come across, thus becoming consumers and producers. This is unlike any other medium. For example, we use Facebook to share and 'like' pictures found on our friends' walls, creating data. Thus, new media users must be protected from ethical violations as producers and creators of information. Let us first try to understand their responsibilities as creators.
13.6.2 Understanding Social Media Rights and Ethics
Digital Rights have become very important in this information age. The rights of the content creator and the consumer or reader must be protected. There are many challenges here, as Internet consumers are mostly prosumers. They must watch out for ethical violations as creators and consumers of online content. Since establishing ownership is easier, the content creator's rights are always discussed more fervently.

Copyright Infringement Participation in
Media and
Information Many websites are offering paid content online. This is done to ensure that Systems artists/writers who are contributing content are compensated and motivated to contribute further. However, some file-sharing companies allow illegal downloading and sharing of files, which leads to piracy. The rampant music piracy, or copying digital goods such as audio files, videos, reports, articles, and so on, without the consent of the person who holds the copyright, is a major problem. As users, we tend to become careless about copying and pasting desired information, and sometimes, we inadvertently infringe on fellow netizens' copyrights.
Open Content Vs Free Content
David Wiley has specified that online content can be open or free. It is important to distinguish between the two. Any online content that can be accessed, revised, reused, redistributed, remixed and retained for later use is called open content. This means the online content need not be open even if it is free, implying that free content is not the same as 'open' content. Free means one can access the content free of cost, but 'open' means users are free to download, edit, and share the content without any ethical or legal limitations. The problem of creating ethical guidelines for the Internet has risen because it is a relatively new medium. A vast amount of content is floating around on the Internet, and many conventions define our ethical boundaries concerning using online content. The automatic copyright of the online content lasts 70 years and becomes available for public use. However, new types of online copyright licensing now tell us how a particular content should be used. Creative Commons is one such organisation that works on providing people access to creative work and intellectual property while giving them the right to choose the conditions for making that work available to consumers. In simple terms, whenever a user posts fresh information online, he/she can specify how it has to be used by mentioning whether the material is free for modification/download/sharing, etc., or partly available/ not available. This is done via symbols and attributions now commonly used on the Internet. Apart from legal considerations, there are many ethical issues that new media users must be aware of.
13.6.3 Social Media Ethics
Ethics are moral codes of conduct. They define how we behave online and help us decide about our 'netiquettes'. Social media ethics can be defined as ethical considerations defining our online conduct. They tell us how to appropriately use the new media without breaching any law or infringing on the online rights of other users. They provide a model code of conduct for creators, distributors and users of online content. The guideline for good 'netiquette' is very simple. When we post something about a text, we should point to the original text while commenting so that our post is not taken out of context. We must be careful while posting any

Participation in data online. Before doing it, one must consider the long-term consequences.
Interactive Media
We should be mindful of different types of readers online. They may represent different beliefs, sensibilities and cultures. Hence, we should respect that. In case we have committed a mistake, we must immediately apologise and remove the concerned text from where it was posted. We should be gracious in disagreements also. Expressing any negative opinion online on a public forum can be disturbing for any individual. (http://infosecawareness.in/students/internet-ethics ) The foremost thing is to double-check the data we post online and be critical, observant, and watchful while sharing content or talking to strangers. We should also encourage our acquaintances and friends to point out any errors or mistakes we might have committed. As new media users, we must understand the constantly changing online world and learn how to deal with emerging ethical challenges. We must also create policies to ensure no conflict of interest between content creators and online consumers. Users also need to be more aware of new crimes being committed online. Most importantly, we must be aware of new media ethics and willing participants in making the Internet more productive, responsible, and happy for all users. Activity - 4 Mention any recent ethical violations on social media and cite ways to prevent or improve the situation. Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the difference between Free and Open content? What is Creative
Commons?

2. What do you understand about social media ethics?

13.7 LET US SUM UP
An 'Information society' is one in which information creation, distribution, diffusion, use, and manipulation is a significant economic, political and

cultural activity (Webster, 1995). The processes and systems that combine Participation in
Media and
media and information-gathering mechanisms for collecting and Information disseminating information and ideas are known as media and information Systems systems. Media and information systems play a vital role in this networked society. They are crucial agents for making sense of one's environment, seeking desired information and facilitating complete participation in activities around ourselves. Once defined as unidirectional or passive receivers of media messages, the audience/user has become an active media content producer. The direction of communication has changed from top-down to both horizontal and vertical. The content generated by users pushes them from the traditional domain of consumer to 'prosumer' (producer + consumer), where they are generating and consuming information at the same time. Participatory culture is the one that encourages all members of society to engage with the media in ways that are comfortable for them. Few barriers exist to artistic expression and civic engagement in a participatory culture. Users are encouraged to share their creations and collaborate with other individuals. As more and more prosumers create content, the old structures of content creation are being challenged continuously. Tapscott and Williams (2006) use the term "prosumption" (production/consumption) to describe the activities of prosumers. Some characteristics are unique to production. Bowman & Willis (2003) define participatory journalism as the act of a citizen, or group of citizens, playing an active role in collecting, reporting, analysing and disseminating news and information. This participation intends to provide independent, reliable, accurate, wide-ranging and relevant information that a democracy requires. As new media users, we must understand the constantly changing online world and learn how to deal with emerging ethical challenges. We must also create policies to ensure no conflict of interest between content creators and online consumers. The users need to be more aware of new crimes being committed online. Most importantly, we need to be aware of new media ethics and be willing participants in making the Internet more productive, responsible, and happy for all users.
13.8 KEYWORDS
Ubiquitous: Present, appearing, or found everywhere. Demassification Refers to restructuring the media industry into smaller independent operating entities. It means breaking (something standardised or homogeneous) into elements that appeal to individual tastes or special interests, e.g., to demassify the magazine industry into special-interest periodicals. Media convergence: A phenomenon involving the interconnection of computing, communication, and content--and is a direct consequence of the digitization of media content and the popularisation of the Internet. Media convergence transforms established industries, services, and work practices and enables entirely new forms of content to emerge. It erodes the long-

Participation in established media industry and content "silos" and increasingly uncouples
Interactive Media
content from particular devices. Glocalization: Products or services designed to benefit a local market while being developed and distributed globally. Glocalization is a mixture of and the result of combining globalisation and localization. Post-truth: Relating to or denoting circumstances in which objective facts are less influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to emotion and personal belief Misinformation: False or inaccurate information, especially that which is deliberately intended to deceive Fake news: False, often sensational, information disseminated under the guise of news reporting Hyper-reality is defined as the inability of consciousness to distinguish reality from a simulation of reality, especially in technologically advanced postmodern societies. It is a state in which real and fiction are seamlessly blended, so there is no clear distinction between where one ends and the other begins.
13.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bowman, S. & Willis, C. (2003). In Lasica, J.D (Ed.) We Media: How
Audiences are shaping the Future of News and Information. Online Journalism Review. The Media Center at The American Press Institute
2. Bruns, A. (2006). Towards produsage: future for user-led content
production. In Sudweeks, F., Hrachovec, H., Ess, C, (Eds.), Proceedings cultural attitudes towards communication and technology. (pp. 275-
284) . Perth: Murdoch University.
3. Bruns, A. (2008). The future is user-led: the path towards widespread
produsage. Fibreculture Journal, p. 11.4. Huybrechts, L. (ed.) (2014). Participation is risky. Approaches to joint
creative processes. Amsterdam: Antennae Valiz.
5. Jenkins, Henry, with Purushotma, Ravu, Weigel, Margaret, Clinton,
Katie, and Alice J. Robison. (2006) Confronting the Challenges of a
Participatory Culture: Media Education for the 21st Century. White
Paper. The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/full_pdfs/Confronting_the_Challenges.pdf
6. McLuhan, M., Nevitt, B. (1972). Take Today: the executive as a dropout.
(p.4). Harcourt Brace Janovich.
7. Mihailidis, P. & Thevenin, B. (2013). Media Literacy as a Core
Competency for Engaged Citizenship in Participatory Democracy. American Behavioral Scientist, 57(11), 1611-1622. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0002764213489015
8. Pistone, G.(2014). Prosumer in the Arts: how participatory projects are
changing cultural productions. Universita Ca' Foscari Venezia. Pg. 1-69.

DOI: 10.13140/2.1.5012.2566 Participation in
Media and
9. Ritzer, G., Jurgenson, N. (2010). Production, consumption, presumption: Information
Systems capitalism's nature in the digital "prosumer" age. Journal of Consumer Culture 10:13. Sage Publications.
10. Schafer, M. T. (2010). Bastard Culture! User participation and the
extension of the cultural industries. (selected parts). Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
11. Sharma A. R. (2018). Promoting Global Competencies in India: Media
and Information Literacy as Stepping Stone. In M. Yildiz, S. Funk,& B. De Abreu (Eds.), Promoting Global Competencies through Media Literacy (pp. 160-174). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. DOI: 10.4018/978-1- 5225-3082-4.ch010
12. Toffler, A. (1980). The Third Wave: The classic study of tomorrow. In
The rise of the prosumer. (chapter 20). New York: Bantam.
13.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. A passive audience receives media messages and is affected by them but
does not react to the content in any way. On the other hand, an active audience constantly revisits media content to make new meanings, point out contradictions, express dissent or disagreement, and provide feedback to media content creators.
2. Traditional media brought an organised gatekeeping and editorial
process that demarcated news, opinion, and editorial. With the advent of new media, traditional media began to be considered anti-democratic and non-participatory. This new media offers interactivity, decentralisation, ubiquity, media convergence, and non-linear representation of information in a non-hierarchical manner.
3. They are individuals simultaneously involved in both producing and
consuming information and media. Prosumers can now locate, dissect, associate, replicate, co-produce and share media and information with the sender and among themselves. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Jenkins et al. (2009) state that " a participatory culture is emerging as the
culture absorbs and responds to the explosion of new media technologies that make it possible for average consumers to archive, annotate, appropriate and re-circulate media content in powerful new ways" (pg.
8) . The characteristics are:
* Both makers and participants work with different disciplines, consciously exiting their comfort zone. * Makers are consciously handing over part of the control, as their ideas can be discussed, adapted and even changed by participants. * The project is open to a larger group of potential participants, and

Participation in the best way to address and involve this audience in the process has
Interactive Media
not been known from the beginning. * Participatory projects are developed within a network and thus have to deal with the expectations and opinions of several subjects. * There is no clear separation between makers and participants, as they are all actors in the same process.
2. Presumption Characteristics:
* Dominance of User-led content production * Collaborative engagement * Palimpsest development * Alternative approaches to intellectual property * Heterarchical structure Check Your Progress: 3
1. Forms of participatory culture:-
* Affiliations -- formal and informal memberships in online communities centred around various forms of media, such as Friendster, Facebook, message boards, metagaming, game clans, or MySpace). * Expressions -- producing new creative forms, such as digital sampling, skinning and modding, fan video making, fan fiction writing, zines, and mash-ups). * Collaborative Problem-solving -- working in formal and informal teams to complete tasks and develop new knowledge (such as through Wikipedia, alternative reality gaming, and spoiling). * Circulations -- Shaping media flow (such as podcasting and blogging).
2. Types of participatory media
* Audience participation (such as user comments attached to news stories, personal blogs, photographs or video footage captured from personal mobile cameras, or local news written by community residents). E.g.:- ohmynews.com, CGNet Swara, Gramvaani and the hyper-local newspaper Khabar Lahariya * Independent news and information Websites (altnews.in, wikileaks.com) * Full-fledged participatory news sites (Citizen Matters, 'Fair Observer') * Collaborative and contributory media sites (Slashdot, Merinews,
Youthkiawaaz, Newsvine)
* Other kinds of "thin media" (mailing lists, email newsletters) * Personal broadcasting sites (video broadcast sites such as KenRadio)
3. Citizen journalism is the act of a citizen or group of citizens playing an
254 active role in the process of collecting, reporting, analysing, and

disseminating news and information. This participation intends to Participation in
Media and
provide independent, reliable, accurate, wide-ranging and relevant Information information that a democracy requires Systems Check Your Progress: 4
1. Impact of Citizen Journalism on traditional media - Mainstream media
outlets have started recognizing the power of citizen journalism and the challenges it poses. Participatory media has brought about deeper democratisation of media, so much so that it is loosely referred to as the 'fifth' pillar of democracy (the fourth being mainstream media). The hegemony of mainstream media is now facing a real challenge. News organisations must now be serious about upholding values such as accuracy, credibility, and story sourcing. The agendas earlier set by mainstream media are now challenged, and members of the public question expert opinions. The skills of journalists need to be sharper and flexible enough to adjust to this new type of participatory journalism ecosystem. Mainstream media must maintain its presence and popularity in real and virtual worlds while remaining competitive, profitable and adaptive. Check Your Progress: 5
1. Open and Free Content:- David Wiley has specified that online content
can be open or free. It is important to distinguish between the two. Any online content that can be accessed, revised, reused, redistributed, remixed and retained for later use is called open content. This means the online content need not be open even if it is free, implying that free content is not the same as 'open' content. Free means one can access the content free of cost, but 'open' means users are free to download, edit, and share the content without any ethical or legal limitations.
2. Social media ethics can be defined as ethical considerations governing
our online conduct. They tell us how to appropriately use new media without breaching any law or infringing on the online rights of other users. They provide a model code of conduct for creators, distributors, and online content users.

UNIT 14 POLITICAL PARTICIPATION AND
Interactive Media
DIGITAL MEDIA
Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Conceptual Understanding of Political Participation
14.2.1 Dimensions of Political Participation
14.2.2 Online Political Participation
14.3 Digital Media Tools for Participation
14.4 Digital Public Sphere and Political Debates
14.5 Democracy and Digital Media
14.6 Citizenship and Participation
14.7 Media and Information Literacy (MIL): A Prerequisite for Political
Participation
14.7.1 Discussion on Components
14.7.2 Indian Context
14.8 Let Us Sum Up
14.8 Further Readings
14.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
The term "political participation" encompasses a broad range of actions citizens take to express their political beliefs, influence public policy, and support the democratic process. The extensive availability of the Internet in the modern era has tremendously improved people's capacity to participate in political processes. Internet-based applications have shown that they can motivate millions of individuals to take part in political processes that have real-world consequences. When individuals participate in their political system online or offline, they engage in individual and collective actions, occupying new levels of socio- political interaction. The proliferation of digital ecosystems has simplified political participation, catapulting the Media and Information Literacy (MIL) into the sphere of political culture. The ultimate goal of MIL in this setting is to strengthen ties between the state and the people. The digital age information system makes available a plethora of data about political problems, candidates, parties, and government policies. Users can easily access a wide range of information, including news, analysis, and multiple points of view, allowing them to enlighten themselves better and make sound choices, thus being politically included in society. To achieve the objective of political inclusion, citizens must have easy access to 256 information and political agencies that encourage them to participate in

policy making indirectly, influence the enforcement of laws, evaluate the Political
Participation and
performance of our government, and assist others in doing the same.
Digital Media
14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the basics of political participation in both traditional and digital contexts; * Explore how digital media tools are used for political engagement; * Examine how digital platforms influence political debates; * Investigate the relationship between democracy and digital media; and * Enhance media and information literacy for effective political participation.
14.2 CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING OF
POLITICAL PARTICIPATION
Van Deth (2014) defined political participation as "citizens' activities affecting politics". Citizens' participation is very important for democratic decision-making, and this has led to a significant increase in the study of political participation during the past few decades. Participation in politics involves a wide range of actions that allow people to have their voices heard, shape policy that affects their daily lives, and shape the world around them. Beginning with a heavy emphasis on voting and electoral engagement in the 1940s and 1950s, the repertoire of ways to acquire influence has expanded lately to include actions like signing petitions, blocking traffic, donating money, and even fighting with the police.
14.2.1 Dimensions of Political Participation
Traditional studies of citizen involvement in politics have centred on voting. However, contemporary conceptions of political participation have expanded to encompass a broader range of activities. Brady (1999) defined political engagement as ordinary citizens' actions intended to influence some political outcomes. Verba and Nie (1972) described participation in four typologies: voting, campaign activity for political parties, contact with public officials, and cooperative or communal activities related to local communities. A more comprehensive typology, including five dimensions, was proposed by Teorell et al. (2007). According to them, political participation is the act of voting, consumer participation ( e.g. donating money, boycotting products, and buying political products), involvement with political parties (e.g. working for, volunteering with, or financially supporting a political party), participation in protest activities (e.g. demonstrations, strikes, and other forms of protest), and contact activity (e.g. reaching out to groups including organisations, politicians, and government officials). More recently, Ekman and Amna's (2012) presentation distinguished between latent and manifest political participation.

Participation in Table 1. Latent and manifest forms of political participation ( Ekman &
Interactive Media
Amna, 2012) Latent political participation Manifest political participation
Involvement Civic Formal Activism (extra-parliamentary
(attention) engagement political participation (action) participation Individual forms
Legal Illegal
Interest in Activities are Election To make one's Individually politics and based on a involvement voice known or committed social issues person's and contact to make a unlawful acts interest and activities difference by with a political focus on personal motivation Keeping politics and methods (such societal as signing watch on concerns. petitions or current political political consumption) events through extra- parliamentary forms of participation. Collective forms
A feeling of Volunteer Membership Network-based Protests and
membership in work is done in political illegal and a group or outside of conventional participation, violent collective with one's family political e.g. new social activities: a distinct and close parties, trade movements, Conflicts with political circle of unions, and demonstrations, the police or profile or friends to other strikes, and political agenda. enhance organisations protests opponents conditions in include the local protests, Lifestyle- community, rioting, related politics for charity, or squatting, (for instance, to assist property identity, others. destruction, clothing, music, cuisine, and confrontations. and values) Only through latent forms of participation can new political behaviours and the chances for political involvement in various countries be comprehended, as Ekman and Amna (2012) stated.

14.2.2 Online Political Participation Political
Participation and
Digital Media
The Internet has enabled new types of mediated political engagement, thus broadening the scope of political participation. Such new online forms of participation raised hopes for a stronger engagement of politically underrepresented demographics like women, ethnic minorities, youth, the less educated, and low-income individuals. Online political participation can be psychological (psychological engagement in politics using digital media) or behavioural (online political behaviours: attending civic events online, contacting officials online, volunteering online, or working in online campaigns). Verba, Schlozman, and Brady (1995) define political participation as psychological and behavioural involvement in civic and public affairs with the clear expectation of influencing government actions. Gibson and Cantijoch (2013) identified types of online and offline participation: passive engagement consists of news attention, discussion, and the expressive mode, whereas active participation includes voting, party or campaign activities, protest activities, contacting, communal actions, and consumerism. Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram have evolved into potent instruments for online political engagement. Users can get their voices heard, disseminate political content, discuss contemporary topics, and make meaningful connections with others who share their views. People can band together for a common cause or a political campaign using online communities and grassroots movements made possible by social media. People can organise and sign online petitions to lobby for policy changes or support certain causes on digital media platforms. It is possible to influence policymakers by circulating and collecting signatures for these petitions. Political dialogues and debates on digital media platforms can now be held across geographic boundaries. Sharing opinions, posing questions, and conversing with others are all possible through internet forums, comment sections, and live streaming. Discussions like these help people learn more about politics, develop critical thinking skills, and affect public opinion. Two main categories describe how an individual participates in politics via digital media. The three categories are: i) Passive engagement: An individual is exposed to information related to political affairs but is not compelled to take any kind of action. ii) Active participation means doing something to make a difference in the political system. To be more specific, three distinct types of political influence can be attained through political participation: influence over particular policies (primary influence), influence over the selection of public officials responsible for making these policies (secondary influence), and influence over the political preferences and behaviours of other citizens (tertiary influence).

Participation in 14.3 DIGITAL MEDIA TOOLS FOR
Interactive Media
PARTICIPATION
Digital media tools encourage digital participation by providing platforms and resources facilitating engagement, collaboration, and information sharing. They enable people to contribute their voices, perspectives, and expertise to various political and civic discussions and activities, nurturing a more inclusive and participatory democratic landscape. Digital media tools for political participation include social media platforms, online forums and discussion boards, crowdsourcing platforms, petitions and campaigns, and mobile applications. Social media platforms: Social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram enable individuals to connect, share, and engage with a larger audience. These platforms permit users to voice their opinions, discuss political issues, and generate public debates. Online forums and discussion boards provide virtual locations for individuals to engage in conversations, debates, and knowledge exchange. These platforms enable individuals to pose queries, share information, and discuss topics of particular interest. They facilitate the development of communities and the exchange of diverse viewpoints. For example, "Youth4work" is an online forum to discuss political issues. Crowdsourcing platforms: Digital media tools facilitate crowdsourcing, in which individuals collectively contribute to a project or acquire information. Crowdsourcing platforms and initiatives enable individuals to report news, document events, and share local perspectives that conventional media outlets might not cover. This encourages citizen participation in shaping the narrative of the news. For example, we can mention "participial," a collaborative crowdsourcing project that tracks democratic innovation and public engagement across the globe. Online petitions and campaigns: Platforms such as Change.org, Avaaz, and other similar websites permit individuals to create and sign online petitions, thereby raising awareness about particular issues and advocating for change. These platforms amplify individual voices, mobilise support, and allow citizens to communicate their concerns and advocate for policy change. Mobile applications: Mobile applications are crucial in encouraging digital participation, especially in regions with high mobile penetration. Mobile applications can provide features such as digital government facilities, election information, and engagement platforms. These applications provide citizens with easy and accessible methods to participate in political processes via their smartphones. For example, the MyGov (India) mobile application is a citizen engagement platform.

Political Activity 1 Participation and
Digital Media
Creating an online political campaign Create a unique hashtag related to a political topic you are interested in and use that hashtag in your social media posts to create awareness and encourage participation.
14.4 DIGITAL PUBLIC SPHERE AND
POLITICAL DEBATES
An effective democracy demands a deliberative public sphere, an informal space for citizens to acquire information and communicate with one another to detect problems and bring them to the public's attention. The digital public sphere is the virtual space where people engage in public discourse, exchange ideas, and discuss various topics, including politics. It blurs the distinctions between professional journalists, politicians, and ordinary citizens. The digital public sphere significantly influences political debates by enhancing accessibility and amplifying voices. However, obstacles such as fragmentation, disinformation, and polarisation appear. The features of digital public spheres are discussed as follows: Inclusion: The digital public sphere has increased the accessibility and reach of political discussions. Online platforms and social media enable people from diverse backgrounds, locations, and social groups to engage in political discussions. It has democratised information access and facilitated interaction beyond traditional offline spaces. Voice amplification: Digital media platforms enable individuals to amplify their voices and participate in political debates. Previously underrepresented or marginalised groups can now express their opinions, share their experiences, and challenge dominant narratives. This increased variety of perspectives contributes to a more inclusive and lively political discourse. Fragmentation and echo chambers: While the digital public sphere enables a diversity of voices, it can also fragment political discourse. Online algorithms and personalised content delivery may generate echo chambers in which individuals are predominantly exposed to information and opinions supporting their beliefs. This can restrict exposure to diverse perspectives and impede productive political discourse. Disinformation and propaganda: The digital public sphere has also witnessed the propagation of disinformation and the amplification of polarised perspectives. False information, propaganda, and misinformation can rapidly spread and influence political debates through social media. This threatens the quality and integrity of political discourse and necessitates critical media literacy skills for effectively navigating the online landscape. Influencing public opinion: Digital platforms offer the opportunity to influence public opinion through political debates. Influencers, journalists, and opinion leaders can use digital media to share their perspectives, analyse

Participation in political events, and sway public opinion. Online conversations can influence
Interactive Media
public perception, affecting electoral outcomes and policy debates. Accountability: The digital public sphere encourages citizen engagement and nurtures a sense of accountability among political actors. Citizens can express their concerns, hold politicians accountable, and demand transparency through online discussions. Public scrutiny in the digital space can increase political debates' transparency and responsiveness. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Explain the term "political participation" and discuss its significance in
modern democratic societies. How has the availability of the Internet impacted political participation?

2. What are the dimensions of political participation, and how do they
manifest in both online and offline contexts?

3. Discuss the role of digital media tools in facilitating political
engagement. How do platforms like social media and online forums influence the dynamics of political participation?

14.5 DEMOCRACY AND DIGITAL MEDIA
Individual political rights and liberties are at the heart of liberal democracy. According to cultural theory, democratic governance is supported by a culture in which all individuals can participate in social processes of meaning-making and access to diverse viewpoints (Balkin, 2015). The proliferation of online communication tools makes it easier for individuals to participate in politics. New kinds of political engagement and the role of digital media in making them possible are important lenses through which to view digital democracy. Young people are heavily represented and engaged online, especially on social media. Thus, Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn are just a few examples of the many online communication channels that enable citizens to participate in public and political debates in the modern era.

Digital media has been perceived both as a threat to democracy and as a Political
Participation and
potential boon to citizen participation in government. Participation, political
Digital Media
awareness, trust, polarisation, populism, and echo chambers are six elements that shift significantly with digital media usage and significantly impact democracy (Lorenz-Spreen et al., 2022). In many cases, the first two factors have a favourable impact, whereas the remaining factors hurt democracy. However, the political environment of a State is crucial to evaluating the components. In countries where democracy is still in its formative stages, such as South America, Africa, and Asia, the favourable effects of digital media on political involvement and information consumption were most obvious. There was more evidence of the negative impacts in the well- established democracies of Europe and the United States, such as rising populism polarisation and falling political trust.
14.6 CITIZENSHIP AND PARTICIPATION
Voice, agency, and participation are transformed into meaningful experiences with citizenship status. To make participation more flexible, citizenship education is crucial. In an educational context, educational practice contributes to developing civic competencies, knowledge, and beliefs. After that, civic competencies give rise to political competencies. From the school learning stage onward, civic development concepts expand. Socio-political development theory explains that the civic development of students occurs in five steps: gaining knowledge (cognitive stage--social and emotional development) where social problems are introduced; logical skills where social problems are recognised; emotional abilities (capacity to contribute to social change) in the youth phase; political capabilities where youth learn to address problems civically; and social competencies where youth establish relationships. Citizens can contribute to decision-making when they acquire the skills to evaluate a problem from a civic and political perspective. The strategic approach could be promoted at the community level to establish citizenship education, raise public awareness, and encourage participation from individuals of all ages. In the community context, citizenship education addresses civic literacy, diversity and intercultural understanding, environmental sustainability, democratic values, and human rights. Citizenship education must be inclusive of marginalised groups like minorities, expatriates, etc. Change agents such as the media, government, educational institutions, community centres, and libraries must promote it at the community level.
14.7 MEDIA AND INFORMATION LITERACY
(MIL): A PREREQUISITE FOR POLITICAL
PARTICIPATION
Media and information literacy empower citizens. Political participation enables citizens to actively engage with society's institutions and the public sphere, facilitating democratic participation in political activity.

Participation in The four prerequisite conditions for political participation are mutually
Interactive Media
reinforcing factors: i) Relevant knowledge and skills: Individuals must possess pertinent information. The knowledge source should be objective and exhaustive. If they wish to participate in the public sphere, they must have the disposition and the capacity to express their ideas and beliefs. ii) Loyalty to democratic values and procedures: The willingness to adhere to democratic principles supports the entire legal, political, and democratic governance system. Democracy will not function if the participants' worth and loyalty fail. iii) Citizenship identities: To participate, one must identify oneself as a citizen. The formal perspective of citizenship conceptually denotes political life in a democracy, whereas the social perspective of citizenship conceives citizenship in specific sets of practices and social agency. iv) Respect for fundamental civil and political rights There must be an appreciation for civil rights and the rights of minority groups, including the notion that fundamental rights can be freely exercised.
14.7.1 Discussion on Components
Renee Hobbs (2010) outlined five core skills for digital media literacy that promote active political engagement and participation through consuming and creating content. These five criteria are considered when Hobbs' elements are applied to the political arena. The skills are: i) Access: Locating and utilising appropriate media and technological resources to access political information and disseminating pertinent information to others. ii) Analyse and evaluate: Comprehending information and thinking critically about it to assess its quality, authenticity, reliability, and point of view, as well as the implications or consequences of such information. iii) Create: Creating or composing content with creativity and self- expression. iv) Reflect: Consider the application of social responsibility to one's self- identity and communication practices. v) Act: Participating individually or collectively in the political process at local, regional, national or international levels.

Political
Participation and
Digital Media
Figure 14.1: Essential competencies of Digital and Media Literacy (Hobbs, 2010) Citizens with political differences can express themselves non-violently in a democracy through participation in political life and empowerment. It is necessary to evaluate the function of media and information literate citizens in information flow. A media and information literate citizen (i) understands the value of information in a democratic society; (ii) is aware of the role of information providers in a democracy; (iii) identifies the source of information; (iv) can evaluate information from any source; (v) knows when and where to share information; and (vii) can communicate effectively with the public.
14.7.2 Indian Context
The digital world of mobiles, the Internet, and big data either exacerbates or facilitates the political outcomes of information and communication technologies. Emerging information and communication norms foster nuanced and substantive conversations. Access to, consumption, and dissemination of information among communities has become spontaneous. In addition to the well-known media conglomerates, new organisations such as Google, Microsoft, and Meta assume control over the production of content and the engagement landscape. The new legacy organisations promote the global dissemination of information and communication. As a result, new connective platforms have evolved into a reservoir for sharing information, bringing together individuals who advocate for local, regional, and national causes. In India, a citizen's ability to take part in the democratic process of their country depends on his or her familiarity with both state and civic issues. Participation in the administrative arena is essential to good governance from the top down. Civic and political knowledge, as well as the ability to shift relevant information from an ocean of information, are crucial for the citizens of India to participate in the political process effectively. National political participation is compromised due to the low MIL skills of its citizens. All citizens should be familiar with the paradox of information and media since it is through the media (print, radio, and online) that we learn about changes in government and society. Critical thinking about political messages and genuine engagement can be fostered by developing media and information

Participation in literacy (MIL).
Interactive Media
Specifically, marginalised groups such as tribals, women, and religious minorities may benefit from online political participation. This improves prospects for fostering quality in all segments of society, as the Internet provides people from underrepresented groups a platform to share their stories and opinions, making political discourse inclusive. Nonetheless, MIL helps transform skills into valuable functioning, including public engagement in digital forms and using all available online communication channels. Activity 2 Online political information access and analysis Identify credible sources of online political information and differentiate between reliable news outlets, fact-checking websites, and opinion-based platforms. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Analyse the concept of the digital public sphere and its relevance in
shaping political debates.

2. Explore the relationship between democracy and digital media.

3. Evaluate the importance of media and information literacy (MIL) for
effective political participation.

4. Reflect on the ways in which individuals can utilise digital media to
influence policy making, evaluate government performance, and promote civic engagement.

14.8 LET US SUM UP Political
Participation and
Digital Media
In this Unit, we discussed the intricate relationship between political participation and digital media. Through this Unit, you have learnt a comprehensive understanding of the multifaceted nature of political participation, spanning traditional and digital realms. Also this Unit has explored the dimensions of political engagement, including individual and collective actions, within the context of the digital public sphere. Moreover, this Unit explained the various digital media tools that facilitate political participation, recognizing their role in shaping political debates and influencing democratic processes. It analysed the significance of media and information literacy (MIL) as a prerequisite for effective political engagement, particularly in the Indian context.
14.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Balkin, J. M. (2015). Cultural democracy and the First Amendment. Nw.
UL Rev., pp. 110, 1053.2. Brady, H. (1999). Political Participation. In J. P. Robinson, P.R. Shaver,
L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.). Measures of Political Attitudes, pp. 737-801.
San Diego: Academic Press.
3. Carpentier, N., Pruulmann-Vengerfeldt, P., Nordenstreng, K., Hartmann,
M., Vihalemm, P., & Cammaerts, B. (2006). Researching media, democracy and participation: The intellectual work of the 2006
European Media and Communication doctoral Summer School. Tartu
University Press.
4. Ekman, J., & Amna, E. (2012). Political participation and civic
engagement: Towards a new typology. Human Affairs, 22, 283-300.5. Gibson, R., & Cantijoch, M. (2013). Conceptualising and measuring
participation in the age of the Internet: Is online political engagement different to offline? The Journal of Politics, 75(3), 701-716.6. Gordon, E., & Mihailidis, P. (Eds.). (2022). Civic media: Technology,
design, practice. MIT Press.
7. Hobbs, R. (2010). Digital and Media Literacy: A Plan of Action. A White
Paper on the Digital and Media Literacy Recommendations of the Knight Commission on the Information Needs of Communities in a Democracy. Aspen Institute. 1 Dupont Circle NW Suite 700, Washington, DC 20036.8. Lorenz-Spreen, P., Oswald, L., Lewandowsky, S., & Hertwig, R. (2022).
A systematic review of worldwide causal and correlational evidence on digital media and democracy. Nature Human Behaviour. Advanced online publication.
9. Pateman, C. (2012). Participatory democracy revisited. Perspectives on
Politics, 10(1), 7- 19.

Participation in 10. Ruess, C., Hoffmann, C. P., Boulianne, S., & Heger, K. (2021). Online
Interactive Media
political participation: The evolution of a concept. Information, Communication & Society, 1-18.11. Teorell, J., Torcal, M., Montero, J. R. (2007). Political Participation:
Mapping the Terrain. In J. W. van Deth, J. R. Montero, A. Westholm
(Eds.). Citizenship and Involvement in European Democracies: A
Comparative Analysis, pp. 334-357. London & New York: Routledge.
12. Van Deth, J. W. (2014). A conceptual map of political participation. Acta
politica, 49, 349-367.13. Verba, S., Nie, N. H., Kim, J-O. (1978). Participation and Political
Equality: A Seven-Nation Comparison. Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
14. Verba, S., Schlozman, K. L., & Brady, H. E. (1995). Voice and equality:
Civic voluntarism in American politics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
14.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. "Political participation" refers to citizens' engagement in activities aimed
at influencing public policy and supporting democratic processes. In modern democratic societies, it holds immense significance as it allows individuals to voice their opinions, contribute to decision-making, and hold elected officials accountable. The availability of the Internet has profoundly impacted political participation by expanding access to information, enabling grassroots organising, and fostering online activism. Citizens can now engage in political discourse, campaign for causes, and mobilise support more efficiently through online platforms, thus amplifying their voices and influencing political outcomes.
2. The dimensions of political participation encompass a wide range of
activities, including voting, attending rallies, signing petitions, and engaging in political discussions. In both online and offline contexts, these dimensions manifest through various channels. For example, voting occurs offline at polling stations but can also take place online through electronic voting systems. Similarly, while attending political rallies and protests typically happens offline, individuals can also participate in virtual rallies and online campaigns through social media platforms like Twitter and Facebook.
3. Digital media tools play a crucial role in facilitating political engagement
by providing platforms for communication, information dissemination, and mobilisation. Social media platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram enable individuals to connect with like-minded individuals, share political opinions, and organise collective action. Online forums and discussion boards allow for in-depth discussions on political issues, fostering a more informed citizenry. These platforms influence the

dynamics of political participation by amplifying voices, shaping public Political
Participation and
opinion, and providing a platform for marginalised groups to be heard.
Digital Media
Check Your Progress: 2
1. The concept of the digital public sphere refers to the online space where
individuals engage in public discourse, exchange ideas, and participate in political debates. Digital platforms contribute to the democratisation of discourse by providing accessible and inclusive spaces for individuals to express their opinions, challenge dominant narratives, and hold public figures accountable. The accessibility of digital platforms allows for a diverse range of voices to participate in political discussions, thereby enriching democratic deliberation and fostering civic engagement.
2. The relationship between democracy and digital media is symbiotic, with
the digital age information system playing a crucial role in promoting democratic values and principles. Digital media facilitate transparency, accountability, and civic participation by providing access to information, enabling citizens to scrutinise government actions, and fostering public deliberation. Online platforms also empower marginalised groups, amplify diverse voices, and facilitate political organising, thus strengthening democracy and promoting social change.
3. Media and information literacy (MIL) are essential for effective political
participation in the digital age. MIL enables individuals to critically evaluate information, discern credible sources, and navigate the complex digital information landscape. Components of MIL include information literacy, which involves evaluating sources and verifying information, media literacy, which entails analysing media messages and understanding their impact, and digital literacy, which involves navigating digital platforms and tools effectively. MIL empowers citizens to make informed decisions, engage meaningfully in political discourse, and resist manipulation and misinformation.
4. Individuals can utilise digital media to influence policy-making, evaluate
government performance, and promote civic engagement in various ways. For example, social media campaigns can raise awareness about pressing issues and mobilise support for policy changes. Online petitions and surveys can provide avenues for citizens to voice their concerns and preferences to policymakers. Moreover, digital platforms enable citizens to hold governments accountable by monitoring their actions, sharing information about governance issues, and participating in online discussions about public policies.

P articipation in
UNIT 15 FILM GENRES AND
Interactive Media
STORYTELLING
Structure
15.0 Introduction
15.1 Learning Outcomes
15.2 Introduction to Films
15.2.1 Medium of Entertainment
15.2.2 Medium of Communication
15.2.3 Expectations of Audience
15.3 Film Grammar
15.3.1 Elements of Storytelling
15.3.2 Audio Elements
15.3.3 Visual Elements
15.4 What is a Film Genre?
15.4.1 Types of Genre - Codes and Conventions
15.4.2 Stereotypes - Constructing and Deconstructing
15.5 From Script to Storyboard
15.5.1 What is a Script?
15.5.2 Using Film Grammar
15.5.3 Visualising a Storyboard
15.6 Relevance of Script in Social Media Era
15.7 Let Us Sum Up
15.8 Keywords
15.9 Further Readings
15.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
15.0 INTRODUCTION
The advent of social media platforms has empowered the common Internet users to generate media content in multiple media formats. The affordable data plans and smartphone proliferation added functionality for common Internet users to share various contents online. One popular way of sharing on social media platforms is through visual content - shorts, reels, videos, and streaming. As part of the digital literacy course, this Unit lets us understand the basic grammar of visual media. The film is considered a novelty that borrowed the entertainment components from folk forms and used modern audio-visual technologies to create fantasy in the entertainment sector. Social media visual content is also a mere extension of this evolution of visual entertainment medium. Understanding the film genre would give you a broader perspective on handling the visual content from social media and online platforms.

Do you enjoy watching films? This Unit will introduce you to films as a Film Genres and Storytelling medium of entertainment and communication. We will cover the aspects of film production, elaborating on how a film is made. We will also discuss different genres of storytelling in films and how they affect not only the content but also film grammar and audience expectations. Lastly, you will be taken through various scripting stages, from ideating to visualising a concept.
15.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this Unit, you should be able to: * Understand the various elements of film grammar; * Differentiate between film genres; * Understand the basic concepts behind the writing a script; and * Know how to create a storyboard.
15.2 INTRODUCTION TO FILMS
Can you recall sitting in a theatre, excitedly waiting for the lights to go down and the chatter of people to end so the show could begin? And when the lights finally dimmed, trailers from forthcoming features would start playing, and you would be delighted to get something extra than just the film. Finally, when the film begins, you are transported into a world for a few hours, emotionally invested in the characters' lives on screen while simultaneously marvelling at its beauty. You would laugh, cry, be sacred, and even fall in love with the characters on screen. You would go home carrying more than just the story at the film's end. Such has been the experience of watching films on the larger screen, in a theatre. The film industry is one of the largest industries in the country today, estimated to have a value of 183 Billion INR at the end of 2020. They are the most popular media product of today's time and influence the pop culture to a great extent. From when their screening was limited to the big screen to today when they are readily available on handheld smartphones in everyone's pocket, films have always succeeded in charming their audiences, and the COVID-induced lockdown period adversely affected many industries. Still, the most consumed product during this period was entertainment, especially films, even though the film production industry was also at a standstill. OTT platforms were bringing films and web series worldwide to our homes.
15.2.1 Medium of Entertainment
Invented due to a moving image camera, which was initially seen as a novelty, early films were just recordings of regular actions. Slowly, with the aid of narrative, that is, a story told with the help of putting visuals and, later, audio together, films became a popular entertainment medium. Early film- makers started by recording theatre plays so they could be screened around the globe, a feat that earlier had to be achieved by having the entire troupe travel together. Slowly, film-makers started producing their own stories on film as well. Still being an expensive medium of production, initially, those

Participation in stories were chosen, and they had a sure shot at success. As a result,
Interactive Media
traditional folk tales, mythological stories or narratives from religious epics were converted into film scripts then. Gradually, these narratives became more complex and vivid with time, and with it, the masses adapted and accepted the narratives. Cinema as a medium of entertainment has dominated almost the entire last century. In the olden days, film screenings were held in the open at night, under the star-lit sky, with the help of a projector and a simple white cloth acting as the screen. With theatres opening in the country's hinterland, watching a film on the big screen became a novel experience, limited to new releases or special occasions. When Television was launched, it was widely touted as a replacement for the bigger screen. However, it borrowed content from the films through weekly film screenings, film-based programs, and interviews. With the advent of cable networks, entire channels were devoted to films and filmy music, making cinema even more easily accessible to the public. Films remain the most popular entertainment medium because they offer something to a wide audience base. Indian movies are packed with drama, romance, action, melodic songs, comedy, and suspense, thus catering to all segments of the audience. Films with such a wide mix of genres are called masala films.
15.2.2 Medium of Communication
Do you know what fashion trends were common in the 60's? Or do you know what the insides of space stations look like? You would recall scenes from a film to make that mental picture in your head. Right now, you are being asked to recall certain things, but films, like other media products, often subconsciously influence our concepts and thought formulation. Film producers long ago realised the potential of films to communicate a message to the masses. The popularity and impact of movies have been utilised to discuss many social issues and entertainment. Many relevant issues have been found in the films, ranging from unemployment to gender ratio to the rights of citizens from various quarters. Few such films saw such huge success that they have also been responsible for starting various social rights movements. Candle marches and dharna protests became famous due to films like Rang De Basanti (2006) and Lage Raho Munnabhai (2006). Films like Mother India (1967) and several of Raj Kapoor's films, such as Shree 420 (1954) and Jagte Raho (1956) etc., touched upon issues prevalent in Indian society at that time, such as the empowerment of women and unemployment. Films like these were responsible for spreading awareness about the issue in society and changing the masses' perspective ever so slightly. In recent years, films like Taare Zameen Par (2007), Pink (2016), and Toilet Ek Prem Katha (2017) have been responsible for bringing a sea change in the perspectives of society on the issues of dyslexia, consent and availability of proper sanitation in rural areas of the country respectively. In times of media trials, where media platforms are widely responsible for

shaping public opinion, films like No One Killed Jessica (2011) and Talwar Film Genres and Storytelling (2015) have helped bring relevant judicial cases back to the public's attention. Thus, films have been a powerful medium of mass communication.
15.2.3 Expectations of Audience
The film industry heavily depends on the audience's expectations and feedback. If the audience likes a film, the opinion spreads rapidly with word of mouth. The opposite is also true. There have been cases when films with huge budgets, mega-star casts, and interesting themes failed in the ticket window as the audience's reaction was not positive. Film-makers have tried chasing what the audience wants for decades, and scholars and critics have extensively researched and written about it. When film-makers discover a plot that does extremely well at the box office, they try to rehash it repeatedly by adding and subtracting elements from the storyline or changing the setting. These are called formula films or films set on a basic formula or composition of elements. E.g., the old classical romantic tragedy of Romeo and Juliet, written by Shakespeare, has been remade several times. Films like Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak (1988), Ishaqzaade (2012) and Ram Leela (2013) have been based on the same theme, shifting the setting of the story each time but keeping the premise and the end same. Activity 1 Can you identify any other formula in the films? Any storyline or themes that you think are replicated very often? Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are masala films?

2. What are formula films? How do they cater to the expectations of the
audience?

3. Explain the basic expectations of common users from the reels and shorts
of social media?

Participation in 15.3 FILM GRAMMAR
Interactive Media
15.3.1 Elements of Storytelling
All stories follow a basic five-element structure. These five elements are Character, Setting, Goal, Conflict, & Resolution. The character around whom the story revolves is known as the protagonist. At times, the stories could have multiple protagonists, leading to complexity in the narrative. The setting is the environment, time, and place where the story occurs; it could be the medieval ages or a spaceship. The goal is the motivation that drives the protagonist; they could want to rob a bank or woo their romantic interest. Conflict is the roadblock between the goal and the character, adding spice to the story. In a few cases, it could be a person, a situation or, at times, a character's personality. Lastly, resolution is the character's due course to attain their goals. Sometimes, they achieve what they want and sometimes don't. In the latter case, the film is usually classified as a tragedy. All these elements are tied down with the help of a narrative, which is told with the help of audio and visual elements. A narrative can be defined as a chain of interlinked events. These events are tied mostly to the story's beginning, middle, and end, making up the classical three-act structure. The beginning introduces the characters, setting, goal and conflict. The middle usually shows the impact of the conflict on the characters and them devising ways to solve it. The end culminates the story with the outcome of the struggle and efforts of the characters.
15.3.2 Audio Elements
Even when you are sitting alone in a quiet room, is everything ever completely silent? Audio is one of cinema's most underrated and seldom noticed elements and is dominantly seen as a visual medium. Films depend heavily on sound to create a cinematic world, and sound design is a specialised field dealing with the same in film production. It includes planning the audio layout for a particular scene. Four major audio elements are utilised in a film: human voice, music, sound effects and silence. To begin with, the dialogue is the most important audio element. Imagine two characters whispering in a room full of people; the sound recordist would have to record their conversation in a manner that is louder than the chatter in the room, still sounds like a whisper and make sure that it appears that others cannot hear it. This is achieved by planning the sound design. The choice and placement of microphones to record on-location audio or to dub later are a few of the sound recording crew's choices. Next is the background score. Various instruments are played and recorded to create an ambience for the scene. Think of fast-paced, dramatic music for a car chase or a soft, soothing track to shoot a romantic scene. This music track is aided with the help of sound effects. Sound effects are added sounds to underline action on screen. For example, if you see a character drawing a sword from a sheath, you would expect to hear the sharp rubbing sound of metal against metal. The action doesn't seem real if you don't hear that sound. The last element is silence. You can recall the eerie silence in a horror film when the protagonist

is headed towards the kitchen at midnight or a character not saying anything Film Genres and Storytelling but conveying a lot with a silent gaze. Thus, these four audio elements are combined to create a sound design that simultaneously enhances the visuals seen on screen.
15.3.3 Visual Elements
Visual elements of a film can be classified into two major categories: Mise- en-scene and cinematography. Mise en scene is a French term roughly translated to putting on scene or frame and deals with all that you can see in a shot. It is mainly handled by the Production Design department, whose task is to create the look of the film based on the script, as per the director's vision. Anything and everything ranging from finding the right shooting location to creating the set or to acquiring the perfect props, the Production design department handles it all. It is aided by the casting department, which hires the actors based on their suitability in the role, while the Costumes, hair and make-up departments help design the actors' look. Thus, when you discuss Yash Chopra's famous romances, everything from the Swiss Alps to Sridevi to the Chiffon sari she is wearing is part of the Mise-en-Scene of the film. On the other hand, cinematography comprises the creative choices made while shooting the scene. It is purely technical and derives a lot from photography. You may have the most beautiful scenery in front of the camera, but a bad photograph can completely ruin it. Difficult to identify by a regular viewer, this is where film art begins. The cinematographer starts building the film's look from the most basic elements by the director's vision, starting with choosing the camera, lens, and film stock. Then comes how the camera is handled. The camera placement and angles decide the perspective the shot will take. Imagine the protagonist of the story looking through a peephole. You would automatically expect the next shot to be 'through' the peephole, showing the audience what the actor is seeing. Thus, the camera team must position the camera to get this shot. Next comes the shot size, ranging from an extreme close-up to show the sweat on the brow of the protagonist while trying to focus on a task to an extreme long shot where we can see the actors dancing on the cliff of a mountain. This is followed by camera movement. Think of a car chase sequence. Have you ever noticed that it is usually shot from various perspectives rather than just placing the camera in one place and watching the characters run? You would have a shot from inside the car, noticing the expressions of the driver, a shot from outside, showing the distance between two cars, maybe a close-up of feet pressing on the accelerator, another close-up of the actor looking in the back mirror and so on. All these decisions of choosing the camera placement, angle, movement and shot size help create the film's look and pace. Next is lighting, which is usually a collaboration between the Production Design and Cinematography teams as it decides what to highlight in a frame and what mood to create. Think of a period drama, and you can't have very sharp light, as major light sources are sunlight or fire in the form of lanterns, candlesticks, or fireplaces. Think of a story set in an office; you would expect

Participation in the light to be the cool, fluorescent top light in most corporate offices. Thus,
Interactive Media
the set design team allows for light fixtures for the same, and the light team places the light sources to light up a shot. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the different audio elements of a film?

2. What are the five elements of storytelling?

15.4 WHAT IS A FILM GENRE?
You might be a fan of comedies, love action thrillers, or be inspired by biographical dramas. This means that you prefer watching one genre of film over others. A genre can be defined as a category of films that have thematic and stylistic similarities. It is one way of classifying films in film theory. The genre of the film not only affects its storyline but also impacts the filmmaking style and techniques. Each genre has its visual grammar, such as dark sets and high contrast lighting for horror. You would take a look at the scene and would be able to guess if it is a horror film or not. This use of film grammar is known as codes and conventions of a particular genre. The genres could be based on the setting, the theme/mood of the film, or the target audience. These genres also help the audience make a viewing decision, as the audience may choose to watch a family drama or a romantic comedy based on their taste and occasion.
15.4.1 Types of Genre - Codes and Conventions
Here are a few popular genres and their established and accepted codes. * Action: This film contains fast-paced action, dramatic music, chase sequences, and explosions. The actors are usually trained in martial arts; most films are in fight sequences. * Romance: Based usually on themes of boy meets girl. Soft lighting and light mood are the markers of this type of cinema. * Comedy: The film's plot is intended to make the audience laugh. It could also be combined with other genres, such as romantic comedy or action comedy. * Drama Plays on the emotions of the audience. It contains the highs and

lows of human interaction and can also be divided into many subgenres, Film Genres and Storytelling such as courtroom drama, Political drama, Historical drama, etc. * Adventure: A narrative that takes the lead characters on a journey or a quest. The story is based on their experiences in an exotic location. It could also have action sequences. * Horror: Narratives that intend to incite fear in the audience. They usually have supernatural elements and fantasy elements. * Science fiction, also known as Sci-fi, relies on the imagination of future technologies and their impact on humanity. * Thrillers are also known as mystery and suspense films because they rely on building suspense in the audience and have some reveal in the end. They could be further classified into psychological thrillers, detective thrillers, etc. * Western: This genre, extremely popular in the West, includes depictions of places far from the reach of the law, where a villain terrorises the people, and the protagonist, who has shades of grey, takes the law into his own hands for justice. The most popular film in Indian cinema, Sholay (1975), can be classified in the Western genre.
15.4.2 Stereotypes - Constructing and Deconstructing
As genres are based on formulaic storytelling, they usually have a mix of characters and settings they are identified with. At times, these formulas and bracketing of many generalisations result in stereotypes. These stereotypes could be identified with gender, race, or regional or cultural identities. For example, a film from the romance genre would have actors playing stereotyped gender roles. The heroine would be a damsel in distress, and the hero would save her to win her love. And if and when the girl rejects the hero, he drowns himself in whiskey, a la Devdas, a famous character. The hero in any film genre would be a golden-hearted person; it doesn't matter if he is a good or a professional kidnapper. Pick up any film; the protagonist will be an upper-class Hindu male from a Brahmin or Punjabi clan. Another stereotype related to occupation is connected to the depiction of police officers; they would always be shown to be so dedicated to their jobs that their wives would either be fighting with them, separated or dead. In stereotyping depiction of sexuality, characters who don't belong to either of the genders or are not heterosexuals are usually shown as the butt of the jokes in the narrative. Depicting a cultural stereotype, In a comedy, the hero would always have a friend, played by a Sikh actor, who would mouth Punjabi dialogues and break into bhangra at every given chance. Another Muslim character would say salaam or Allah hafiz very frequently. Characters from the southern part of the country would be shown wearing dhotis, with a tilak on the forehead and oiled hair. They would also be eating rice with their hands. Other than the stereotypes portrayed, one would never get to see a tribal character or a character from the northeastern North depicted in the story. Tribals would be portrayed as magical people with powers beyond science's scope if depicted.

Participation in These stereotypes limit representation and, thus, inclusion in popular cinema
Interactive Media
and affect the audience's perception of certain communities, genders, and occupations. This common bracketing also creates a hegemony of the mainstream narrative, which is at times broken by the alternate or parallel cinema movements, if at all.
15.5 FROM SCRIPT TO STORYBOARD
Producing every film begins with the same step, whether it's a mega- blockbuster or a documentary. The scriptwriters begin with a concept and then do the necessary research to develop it into a story. Only some concepts require more research than others; for example, a film set in a fantasy land or having a location-centric plot would require very little research and more creative imagination. On the other hand, for a biographical or historical piece of fiction, the research team would have to understand the era to situate the narrative.
15.5.1 What is a Script?
After the story is in place, the scriptwriters begin writing the script or screenplay. As the word suggests, a screenplay describes what all plays on the screen, from the position and movement of actors to their expressions and, of course, the dialogues. The scriptwriter or the team of scriptwriters compile the entire script and pitch it to the producers. The producers may like the script and decide to put funds in and produce the film, or ask the writers to make a few changes to make it more saleable or discard it altogether. Scriptwriters such as Salim Javed, who used to write scripts together in the 70s, are still recalled as the most successful writer duo as they delivered hit after hit for almost two decades. Many film-makers/directors today, such as Vishal Bhardwaj and Anurag Kashyap, write their scripts. A film script is a detailed description of the visualisation of action on the screen. It is written scene by scene, as the narrative would play out in the film. It mentions the location and time of the day, describes the set, entry/exit, and other movements of actors, and describes the dialogues they will say with their expressions. There is a set format for writing the script, which is accepted and understood by the entire industry. After all the scenes are written down and the script is compiled, it is sent to various teams for further work. Actors are hired based on reading the script, and they refer to this bound script on the set to rehearse their lines and prepare for their scenes.
15.5.2 Using Film Grammar
The most basic element of filmmaking is a shot. The camera person places the camera at a place and decides on a lens, camera angle and movement if required. After much deliberation and consultation with the actors, directors, and sound team, he started shooting. A shot is a single recording from a camera, from the moment it starts till it cuts. After the scripting process, the team starts working on the shot division of the entire script, scene by scene, in consultation with the director and the cinematographer. Shot division is a script breakdown into separate shots for easy shooting. For, if the scene requires the protagonist to enter a room, the shot division could either film

this in one single long shot or cut this down in multiple shots, starting with a Film Genres and Storytelling close-up of feet, then cutting to a mid-shot of the face, and then finally to the entire body. When several shots are combined, it creates a scene. Think of a conversation between two characters. It would have several shots, close-ups of both characters and a long shot of the room or their location. The entire conversation is one scene created by combining many shots. Moving further, when many scenes are combined, it results in a narrative or a story. This is the basic film grammar: words are combined to create a sentence, sentences are combined to create a paragraph and paragraphs are combined to create a story.
15.5.3 Visualising a Storyboard
After the team compiles a shot division for all the scenes, the storyboard artist starts storyboarding the script. A storyboard is a visual representation of the shots. Artists usually draw storyboards with a lot of visual detail, ranging from the position and movement of the characters in the shot to the set design and the costumes. The production design and camera teams then use these storyboards to plan the shots. Think of a storyboard as a comic book of the film, with less emphasis on dialogues and other audio elements. Film-makers like Satyajit Ray are famous for their detailed hand-painted storyboards and their resemblance with the final product. Several software applications are available today that make it easy to draw each shot. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is a film genre?

2. What is the need for creating a storyboard? Particularly in the context of
contemporary digital social contexts?

15.6 RELEVANCE OF SCRIPT IN SOCIAL
MEDIA ERA
Creating visual content is no longer an expensive exercise. With the advent of social media, reels and shorts have become highly popular among young audiences. A lot of creativity is being experimented with in different 279

Participation in scenarios.
Interactive Media
At the core of this course, Digital Media Literacy, social media users need to have a critical understanding of consuming visual content. However, scripting for visual content is a skill required for effective participation in large networks. There are four pillars of the media and information literacy domain, with the fourth pillar describing the participation of media users in communication systems. The affordability of smartphones and the cost-effective availability of data plans help common users create multimodal communication content (combining various media elements into one single package). In this scenario, scripting skills help common users convey effective information to a larger audience. In the previous two units, you learned about the opportunities for civic engagement and political participation. Meaningful and socially responsible public communication ensures greater participation and accountability.
15.7 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, you learnt to look at films as a discipline and not only as a mode of entertainment. We reviewed the film production process, understanding and appreciating film grammar and how all components work together. We then discussed the different genres of films and the codes and stereotypes they build and break while catering to the audience's expectations. Toward the end, we went over writing a script, from ideating to visualising the entire story as a storyboard.
15.8 KEYWORDS
Masala Film -- A film that is a mix of many genres, such as drama, suspense, comedy, romance, etc. Formula film - a mix of all elements that have proven successful at the box office. Shot - The most basic element of filmmaking. An uninterrupted sequence of frames. Screenplay - a description of visual and audio elements on the screen, including the action, expressions, and dialogues. Shot division - breaking down a scene into elements of film grammar Storyboard - A visual representation of the shots.
15.9 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bazin, A. (2004). What is Cinema? Vol. I (Vol. 20). University of
California Press.
2. Bordwell, D., Thompson, K., & Smith, J. (2010). Film art: An
introduction (Vol. 9). New York: McGraw-Hill.

3. Dooley, K. (2017). Digital 'underwriting': A script development Film Genres and
Storytelling technique in the age of media convergence. Journal of Screenwriting, 8(3), 287-302.4. Nelmes, J. (2012). Introduction to film studies. Routledge.Monaco, J.
(2009). How to read a film: Movies, media, and beyond. Oxford University Press.
5. Patel, C. (2021). Stories that matter: developing media with purpose.
6. Rugrien, M. P., & Funk, S. (2022). Social Media Trend 2023: Short-form
VS. Long-form Video (No. 308246). Thammasat University. Faculty of Journalism and Mass Communication.
7. Tran, A. (2024). Optimization of social media video in visual art self-
marketing.
15.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Films that mix genres, such as romance, suspense, comedy, and
musicals, are called masala films.
2. A formula film combines all the elements that have proven successful at
the box office in the past. Audience feedback helps identify these elements for further use.
3. Common users have several expectations from reels and shorts on social
media. Primarily, they seek entertainment through engaging and quick- to-consume content. Relatability is key, as users prefer videos that resonate with their personal experiences, interests, and current trends. Informational value is also important, with users appreciating concise tips, hacks, or educational content. Visually appealing and well-edited videos tend to attract more attention and are more likely to be shared. Authenticity plays a significant role, as genuine content where creators show their real selves fosters trust and stronger connections with viewers. Lastly, users enjoy a diverse range of content, including humour, lifestyle, tutorials, and news, which caters to their varied interests and keeps them coming back for more. Check Your Progress: 2
1. A film has four major audio elements: human voice, music, sound effects
and silence.
2. The five basic storytelling elements are Character, Setting, Goal,
Conflict, & Resolution. Check Your Progress: 3
1. A film genre is a broad category of films with thematic and stylistic
similarities.
2. A storyboard is a visual representation of the shots used by the
production design and camera teams to plan the shooting process.

Participation in Creating a storyboard is crucial, particularly in contemporary digital
Interactive Media
social contexts, as it provides a visual plan that ensures a coherent and logical flow of content. It facilitates efficient communication among team members, making sure everyone is aligned with the vision. Storyboards also enhance time and cost efficiency by identifying potential issues early in the production process, thereby saving resources. In the realm of digital media, engaging storytelling is essential, and storyboards enable creators to plan compelling visuals and narratives that captivate audiences. Additionally, with the diversity of digital platforms, storyboards help tailor content to fit various formats and target audiences, ensuring consistency and effectiveness across different media channels.

UNIT 16 ADVERTISING LITERACY
Advertising Literacy Structure
16.0 Introduction
16.1 Learning Outcomes
16.2 What is Advertising?
16.2.1 Definition and Need
16.2.2 Evolution of Advertising
16.2.3 Advertising, Publicity and Propaganda
16.2.4 Objectives of Advertising
16.2.4.1 General Objectives
16.2.4.2 Specific Objectives
16.2.5 Advantages and Limitations of Advertising
16.3 Understanding Advertising Literacy
16.4 Media for Advertising
16.4.1 Print Advertising
16.4.2 Television Advertising
16.4.3 Radio Advertising
16.4.4 Online Advertising and New Media
16.4.5 Outdoor Advertising
16.4.6 Other Media
16.5 Advertising Techniques
16.5.1 Above-the-Line Advertising
16.5.2 Below the Line Advertising
16.5.3 Through the Line Advertising
16.6 Different Types of Advertising Appeals
16.7 Advertising Communications: Basic Concepts
16.7.1 Information Processing Model
16.7.2 AIDA and DAGMAR Models
16.7.3 Push and Pull Strategy
16.7.4 What is a Brand?
16.7.5 Slogans, Jingles, Trademarks, Logo, Mascot
16.7.6 USP
16.8 The Advertising Management Process
16.8.1 Advertising Strategy
16.8.1.1 Setting Objectives
16.8.1.2 Formulating Budget
16.8.1.3 Creating Advertising Messages
16.8.1.4 Selecting Media and Vehicles
16.8.2 Strategy Implementation
16.8.3 Assessing Advertising Effectiveness
16.9 Let Us Sum Up
16.10 Further Readings
16.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers

Participation in 16.0 INTRODUCTION
Interactive Media
Advertising is considered a creative commercial message aimed at selling services or products. It can also be used to increase sales or publicise social messages. It is the lifeblood of the media for their survival. At the same time, there is a general belief that advertising wastes time, money and resources. Audiences of different mass media would generally prefer freedom from advertising, but as advertising students, you must learn to romance with advertising, just as shown in some Indian films. Watch these ads closely and connect with the ad characters, jingle, slogan and advertising locations. When doing this, you connect with the brand emotionally, start loving it, build a long-lasting relationship, adore the brands you purchase, and feel nostalgic. Besides explaining all about advertisements, this Unit discusses the skills and competencies required to critically analyse intellectually challenging complex ideas presented in a creative and appealing manner. That process is called advertising literacy. By amalgamating the insights from MNM035--media and information literacy--with the previous units from this course, you will gain a comprehensive understanding of the world of promotion-based advertisements. This holistic knowledge will enhance your professional capabilities and instil confidence in your ability to navigate the complex advertising landscape.
16.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After completing this unit, you should be able to: * Discuss principles and practice of advertising; * Understand the advantages, objectives and limitations of advertising; * Help facilitate the use of different media and techniques of advertising; * Analyse the various appeals used in advertising; * Apply various advertising concepts and models, and * Plan and evaluate advertising effectiveness.
16.2 WHAT IS ADVERTISING?
16.2.1 Definition and Need
One common definition of advertising is "any paid form of non-personal communication of information about products or ideas by an identified sponsor through the media in an effort to persuade or influence behaviour of the people in such a manner as to induce them to buy." Despite so many other forms of promotion, why do we need advertising? Production is incomplete without consumption. Customers will consume only when they know the product's availability. Advertising fills this gap between production and consumption. Through advertisements, manufacturers draw consumer attention to the product.

16.2.2 Evolution of Advertising Advertising
Literacy You can trace the evolution of advertising in India in the timeline below: * 1780: James Augustus Hickey started Hickey's Bengal Gazette, the first newspaper published in India. It advertised trade and legal notices. With this, print advertising started. It began with classified advertising. * 1883: Horlicks became the first brand patented as 'malted milk'. * 1605: B. Dattaram and Co. started operations in Mumbai, the oldest ad agency. * 1618: Tata Publicity, the first professionally managed ad agency, was started. * 1620: Foreign-owned ad agencies entered the Indian market. * 1629: James Walter Thompson (JWT) ad agency started its India operations. * 1639: The Indian and Eastern Newspaper Society (IENS) were founded. Lintas' advertising agency was started, and they launched Dalda, the first major example of branding. * 1645: Advertising Agencies Association of India (AAAI) was started. * 1648: Audit Bureau of Circulation (ABC) was founded. * 1652: The Indian Society of Advertisers was formed. * 1655: Advertisers' Club of Bombay (ACB) was set up. * 1659: Telecasting of T.V. programmes commenced. * 1667: The first commercial was aired on Vividh Bharati, an AIR channel. * 1670: Sponsored programmes on radio were introduced. * 1676: Doordarshan (D.D.) was separated from AIR, the first T.V. commercial seen. * 1682: Bombay Dyeing becomes the first colour T.V. ad. * 1685: The Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI) was set up.
16.2.3 Advertising, Publicity and Propaganda
What are the similarities and differences among the three of them? Let us have a look at it in the table below:
Advertising Publicity Propaganda
Giving information Giving information about a Majorly used as a form about a company or company or its products by of political warfare its products by non- personal and/or personal personal means means

Always a It may not be a commercial It may not be a
Interactive Media
commercial transaction. commercial transaction, it transaction, but it encourages sales of encourages a change of products, services or personal beliefs and ideas. values. The source is always The source may not always The source is always known be known known Always a paid form It may not always be paid It may not always be for paid for All advertising is All publicity may not be All advertising may not publicity advertising be propaganda
16.2.4 Objectives of Advertising
Let us look at the purpose of advertising. Objectives of advertising can be classified broadly into two types, namely:
16.2.4.1 General Objectives
* To inform: Done to build primary demand & inform about new product availability. E.g. State Bank of India. * To persuade: The objective is to build demand for a particular brand. For * E.g. Vodafone. * To remind: Established products advertise to remind customers about the brand. E.g. Coca Cola.
16.2.4.2 Specific Objectives
* Induce trial: Advertisers use it to encourage the customer to try the new product. E.g. Vim gel. * Intensify usage: It is done to get another consumer segment to try the product (mostly established brand). For example, Cadbury targeted older people using Amitabh Bachchan. * Sustain preference: Established brands advertise to maintain their market share. E.g. Seagram's Imperial Blue.

* Confirm image: Established brands want to retain their image in Advertising Literacy customers' minds. For example, see the Nescafe ad. * Change habits: These are used to change target customers' buying or consumption patterns, such as Johnson and Johnson's baby wipes. * Build a line of acceptance: This displays the entire range of brands, e.g., a Videocon ad.
16.2.5 Advantages and Limitations of Advertising
Advertising is undoubtedly an inseparable part of the marketing process. Let's look at its benefits for manufacturers and consumers. Pros of advertising for the manufacturer: * It creates primary demand for the brands and hence results in increased sales. * After the initial sales, continuous advertising will ensure a steady demand for the brand. * Increased demand will ensure steady sales, resulting in quicker turnover. * If the brand is being advertised steadily, then over the years, it will generate consumer goodwill for the brand. * If the brand's demand is steady in the market, dealers may also show interest in keeping/warehousing it. * Over the years, manufacturers can sell the goods directly to the consumer, and reduced dependence on middlemen will increase profit as the commission given to these middlemen will be saved. * Advertising will help salespersons in their sales process by making the brand known to the maximum number of target consumers. Pros of advertising for the consumer: * Advertisements inform the consumers about product availability. * As many products are advertised simultaneously, consumers can compare the brands and make a purchase decision. Of course, consumers may not rely on advertisements solely to do so. * Advertising increases competition among brands. To attract the target consumers, competing brands improve the quality of their products, resulting in better-quality products for consumers. * By eliminating the middlemen, consumers will enjoy the benefits of reduced prices. * Consumers who are well-informed about product availability and other details about the brand save time in the purchase decision-making process. * Latest and upgraded products are advertised, and consumers are persuaded to buy them, improving their living standards. Cons of advertising for the consumer: * Too many products on offer make consumers end up purchasing them

Participation in unnecessarily.
Interactive Media
* Advertisements increase the price of the product, making it costlier. * Most advertisements are exaggerated, false, deceptive, and misleading, thus conveying a wrong notion about the brand. * Manufacturers with high advertising budgets advertise more, thus sidelining those who cannot afford to spend more on advertising. This results in a brand monopoly, and consumers may not be aware of the non-advertised products. * Too much sex appeal is used in ads, making them vulgar and demeaning. Limitations of advertising: * Advertisements can only pull consumers towards the initial sale. If the products are of bad quality, then advertising cannot guarantee sales the second time. * Advertising can only persuade consumers and not compel them to buy. * It is a one-way communication, so consumers cannot give feedback. * Exaggerated forms of advertising make advertisements less believable. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. List three advantages and three disadvantages of advertising for
consumers:

2. List the general and specific objectives of advertising:

16.3 UNDERSTANDING ADVERTISING
LITERACY
In the previous section, you learned the basics of advertising. Let us understand the need for advertising literacy in our routine lives. Remember that whether we are reading a newspaper, watching a television programme, or browsing through mobile apps, all major media ventures are supported by sponsored advertisements. There is an exception: if you subscribe to a specific mobile app, you might not be able to see frequent advertisements, or if you have subscribed to a full-fledged premium OTT platform, you might enjoy the programme without any commercial break. Otherwise, we will be inundated mainly by advertisements. Primarily, these advertisements are a

major source of revenue for media entities. On the other hand, these Advertising Literacy advertisements are aimed at the audience's mindset to change their interest, preferences or choices. Advertisers use many techniques and tools to attract the audience's attention and further change the audience's perception. As a regular media user, you need to develop 'advertising literacy skills--the ability to recognise, evaluate and understand advertisements and other commercial messages' (Malmelin, 2010). These skills are crucial in today's media-saturated world. Malmelin devised four dimensions of advertising literacy: informational literacy, aesthetic literacy, rhetorical literacy, and promotional literacy. Each of these dimensions plays a vital role in helping you navigate the complex world of advertising. The conceptual framework of these four dimensions is given in the following table. The first dimension of Malmelin's advertising literacy model, informational literacy, is particularly relevant in our media-driven world. In Block 3 of this course, we extensively studied the concepts and applications of information literacy. Now, let's apply this to advertising. Informational literacy in the context of advertising refers to your ability as a media user to access and critically analyse the information provided or promoted through advertisements. This skill is crucial for making informed decisions about the products or services advertised. Aesthetic or visual literacy describes the need to handle high-quality, appealing advertisements that use sophisticated illustrations, whether print advertisements or the visual fantasy of creatively combining audio and visual appeal in television commercials. These visual elements present complex concepts in a simplified manner, and it might be intellectually challenging to decipher their intercultural meanings. As we mentioned earlier, advertising is all about influencing the behaviour of the audiences. Rhetoric is considered an influencing form of communication used by many, particularly powerful institutions like government, political parties, ideological groups, civil societies, and activists. The same method is being used in various ways by the advertising industry. Media literacy plays a crucial role in empowering the common media audience to critically analyse

Participation in all these rhetoric-based influential messages. According to Malmelin,
Interactive Media
rhetorical literacy focuses on understanding the means of persuasion used in advertising. Rhetorical literacy is the ability to understand different means and strategies of persuasion in advertising and marketing communications in general. The last dimension of advertising literacy is promotional literacy. By its nature, all advertisements or commercial messages or, for that matter, many public communications are aimed at promoting certain ideas/products/ services/ goods, etc. Advertising literacy expects the common media users to be vigilant about these promotional materials and their approaches. Handling those promotional messages equips users to safeguard against the unnecessary influence of powerful messages.
16.4 MEDIA FOR ADVERTISING
Advertising is a mediated form of communication; therefore, it reaches consumers through some kind of media. To use these different media optimally, one needs to understand their properties.
16.4.1 Print Advertising
This can be further classified into newspapers, magazines and yellow pages. All these three forms deal with literate people and hence provide the benefit of literate consumers. Newspaper advertisements are one of the oldest and most popular forms of advertising. Newspapers help advertisers reach a large number of audiences. On the downside, it is a costly proposition as it does not give a choice to niche audiences, unlike magazine advertisements. Magazine contents are designed to keep select target readers. Hence, advertisers can also choose target consumers strategically, thus making it costly. Newspapers have limited shelf life, maybe not more than 24 hours, but magazine ads can be viewed repeatedly until the magazines are disposed of. Newspaper paper quality is not very good; hence, the colour reproduction of advertisements is not very good, whereas magazine ads give a better output due to glossy papers.
16.4.2 Television Advertising
This is one of the most popular and dominant media the masses use. It is widely available, helps advertisers reach many audiences quickly, and maximises exposure. Due to its audio-visual feature, consumers can absorb advertisements more quickly and elaborately. On the downside, it does not give a choice to literate audiences, is one of the most expensive media to advertise in and therefore, big businesses enjoy a monopoly. Most ads are 30- 45 seconds long, and thus, consumers get limited exposure and time to engage in the communication.
16.4.3 Radio Advertising
Radio is an audio medium, so messages must be designed accordingly. It is less expensive than a TV. Advertising duration is also very short, and audiences are not segmented properly. The possibility of switching channels

is lower compared to TV, as people listen to the radio while engaging in Advertising Literacy other activities.
16.4.4 Online Advertising and New Media
This is the most recent yet one of the popular media. The Internet is growing daily, and advertising opportunities are also increasing. It can blend print and television media that inexpensively reach unlimited audiences; audiences can be tracked, and messages can be personalised. The audiences of these media are literate and global. They can access more detailed information about the product in a single click. Some social media platforms are Orkut, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn, Fropper and Ibibo.
16.4.5 Outdoor Advertising
This medium works best when your target customers are not consuming media indoors. Advertisers use different outdoor tools such as hoardings, pole ads, electronic displays, wall paintings, banners, posters, and transit advertising. Transit advertisements are used on buses, trains, and rickshaws. Compared to other media, it is cost-effective, can be easily used in crowded places, and is very flexible when placing advertisements. Since the customers are mobile, longer messages cannot be used in these media and do not give advertisers a choice of audiences.
16.4.6 Other Media
Include direct mail, telemarketing, film advertising, and window display. Catalogues, brochures, sales letters, prospectuses, and others are used through direct mail. Telemarketing and direct mail help reach customers directly and in a personalised manner; the sender controls the message, which can be hidden from the competition. Local products can be best advertised through film advertising. The limitation is film viewers seldom watch these advertisements as they are busy talking. Viewers visit the cinema hall just before the film starts and go out for snacks during the interval when these ads are played. Window display works best at the point of purchase (POP). Carefully and creatively displayed products often catch customer's attention and create demand for that product. The trick is shopkeepers must. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. Name different media of advertising:

Participation in 2. Explain the four dimensions of advertising literacy?
Interactive Media

16.5 ADVERTISING TECHNIQUES
A good advertising technique focuses on society and individuals(potential buyers) in particular while keeping basic communication intact. The key lies in understanding the product, the market, and the customers.
16.5.1 Above-the-Line Advertising (ATL)
Advertising is done at the macro level through mass media. It is a conventional and highly impersonal method. ATL uses TV, radio, newspapers, magazines, and outdoor media, which are very expensive. Brands are built through ATL, and then later, with the help of BTL, potential customers are influenced to take action.
16.5.2 Below the Line Advertising (BTL)
Is advertising done at the micro level that uses unconventional brand-building techniques and is a direct means of communication? BTL uses public relations, direct mail, sales promotion, personal selling, and various price incentives and promotional offers, e.g. coupons, gift with purchase, competitions, price refunds, and frequent buyer programs. BTL helps break through the advertising clutter and cost-effectively reach target groups (T.G.).
16.5.3 Through the Line Advertising (TTL)
Marketers and advertisers now blend traditional advertising techniques such as ATL and BTL to design a customised bouquet in TTL or Integrated Marketing Communications (IMC) activities. When marketers combine both techniques, they cross the line, hence the term TTL. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. Expand the following:
a. ATL b. BTL c. TTL
2. What do you mean by IMC?

16.6 DIFFERENT TYPES OF ADVERTISING Advertising
Literacy
APPEALS
Ads carry an appeal and communicate with the audiences through them. These appeals work at the subconscious level of the customers. Appeals are distinctive claims of an advertisement advertisers use to emphasise product features and attract customer attention. They can be broadly categorised as emotional and rational. These appeals can be further classified as: * Fear appeal: Uses moderate fear to position the product's work, especially for products such as insurance, cosmetics, fairness cream, etc. For example, in the Himalaya Neem face wash advertisement, * Humour appeal is commonly used and has high ad recall, as it catches the audience's attention quickly. For example, Emami Fair and Handsome Cream feature a well-known film actor. * Music appeal: Music has inherent value that helps capture the audience's attention. For example, the Lux advertisement song (Bekabu) features Shahrukh Khan and Katrina Kaif. * Sex appeal: Sensuality raises audience curiosity, but it needs to be strategically used. Improper usage may result in negative effects and may make your ad look vulgar. E.g. Wild stone deodorant advertisement. * Masculine, feminine appeal emphasises product features that will be imparted to the consumer when he/she starts using your product. E.g. Hero Glamour ad. * Scarcity appeal: It is often used to announce promotional and limited- time offers, Such as the Nano special edition. * Adventure appeal: Advertisers associate product features and usage with fun and adventure and emphasise that customers' lives will change drastically after using the product, E.g., Mountain Dew. * Bandwagon appeal: It focuses on peer pressure. Since 'everybody is consuming a particular product, you should too,' the theme of such ads is' everybody is consuming a particular product, you should too.' For Example, the Airtel advertisement. * Testimonial appeal: Here, satisfied customers talk about the product's good qualities and share their positive experiences. For example, all Dove soap ads use this technique. They have used the same technique to launch the new hair oil Dove Elixir. * Slice-of-life appeal: The advertisement shows a real-life problem the customer faces that can be solved using the advertiser's product, e.g., the Harpic ad. * Snob appeal: This creates a feeling of desire and envy for products associated with luxury and elegance. E.g. Volkswagen Polo and Vento ads. * Weasel words appeal: Advertisers here claim that their product is the best, but the claim is superficial and ambiguous. E.g., Kellogg's special K

Participation in Check Your Progress: 4
Interactive Media
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
Fill in the blanks: a) The appeal is often used to announce promotional and limited-time period offers. b) When the ad shows a real-life problem the customer faces that can be solved using the advertiser's product, it uses appeal. c) appeal focuses on peer pressure. d) Advertisers associate product features and usage with fun and adventure to appeal to customers and emphasise that customers' lives will change drastically after using the product. e) When advertisers claim that their product is the best, even though the claim is superficial and ambiguous, it is called appeal.
16.7 ADVERTISING COMMUNICATIONS: BASIC
CONCEPTS
16.7.1 Information Processing Model (IPM)
In the 1640s, William McGuire prepared this model and connected it to the concept of persuasion in ad effectiveness. IPM essentially discusses the behaviour and attitudinal changes in response to persuasive communication. Let us have a look at the outline of the model: The above diagram explains information processing in five steps. * Exposure: All market players simultaneously expose customers randomly to brand-related information through various media and non- media activities. The objective is to inform them about the product attributes. * Attention: Customers choose their ad message based on their interests. Here, marketers face the challenge of attracting T.G.'s attention in a limited period.

* Comprehension: Customers will develop an understanding of the brand Advertising Literacy based on selective attention and interest areas. This is the stage at which T.G. is curious about the brand and wants to know more about it. * Acceptance: Out of the various shortlisted choices, customers accept a particular brand and reject another. This acceptance does not ensure that the decision will remain so forever, and such scepticism can change their decision. * Retention: In this phase, disbelief strengthens belief, and customers adhere to their decisions. Consumers are more determined to continue with the shortlisted brand. Most importantly, when information travels through these five stages, various stimuli, generally marketer--and advertiser-dominated, must reach through them to create a long-term memory. Memory plays an important role, especially at stages two, three, and four.
16.7.2 AIDA and DAGMAR Models
AIDA and DAGMAR are two models of consumer response to advertising and marketing activities. The AIDA model organises the response into four stages, namely: * Attention: Here, advertisers encourage the audience to hear the main idea of the advertisement. This is the first step to response; consumers' attention must be captured by emphasising the product's strong features, a genuine solution to the problem, the promise of savings through discounts, etc. and by providing any common angle that can attract consumer attention. E.g. Lifebuoy hand wash advertisement. * Interest: Once the attention is captured, further interest is generated in the customer's mind, and a more detailed picture of the message is painted--for example, the MamyPoko pants advertisement. * Desire: It helps customers embrace the central idea by explaining how the change will benefit them--E.g. Fortune Rice Bran Oil advertisement. * Action: The advertisement suggests the action advertisers want consumers to take--for example, the Fair and Lovely fairness cream and face wash advertisement featuring Yami Gautam. In 1661, Russel Colley proposed the DAGMAR model. It is expanded to define advertising goals for measured advertising results. As per this model, consumers' purchase decision goes through four stages, namely: * Awareness: Consumers must first know the brand and company's existence and availability. Once this awareness is attained, companies must use it immediately--for example, JustDial.com endorsements by Amitabh Bachchan. * Comprehension: Here, advertisers must focus on product benefits and give a deeper understanding of the product. For example, in the Colgate Super Flexi advertisement, * Conviction: At this stage, ads must build confidence in the customers' minds so they are compelled to buy the product--E.g. Sugarfree Natura

Participation in * Action: In this, the focus is on buying, and therefore, ads emphasise the
Interactive Media
benefits of customers' purchases--for example, Godrej Ezee's advertisement.
16.7.3 Push and Pull Strategy
These are two main types of promotional strategy. In the push strategy, the producer lures wholesalers and retailers in the form of trade shows, direct selling, subsidies, high commission rates, POP displays and others to stock their products and push them towards the customer, as explained in the figure below: Customers may not experience the push strategy as it is directed towards distributors, whereas the pull strategy aims at the end customer. Through various promotional strategies such as advertising, word of mouth, etc., the product is pulled through the channel by customer demand, as explained below: The push strategy is comparatively more interactive and works best in impulse-buying product categories. Companies generally combine both strategies to increase sales.
16.7.4 What is a Brand?
A positive brand image is a valuable asset of the company. Brands are the product's visual identity in the form of logo, colour, labelling, name, tagline, shapes, and graphics. It helps customers identify brand 'A' versus brand 'B'. The branding process is creating a unique brand name and position in the market through advertising and marketing campaigns. A good brand name must be unique, easy to pronounce, identifiable, have recall value, talk about the product's qualities and benefits, have legal protection, and not have wrong meanings associated with that word, especially when extending to another market.
16.7.5 Slogans, Jingles, Trademarks, Logo, and Mascot
These are important ingredients of the branding process and distinguish a company from its competition. A well-designed logo enhances brand value, gives a unique identity to the product, must be easily recognisable, builds trust, makes the product look more professional, and helps consumers associate the brand with the company. A slogan is a watchword, short, catchy phrase or motto used in advertising,

generally along with the logo. It is one of the most appealing tools to be used Advertising Literacy in the branding process and is often called the brand's fingerprint. It connects consumers with the brand and can change their perception. Slogans may change depending on the campaign. For Coca-Cola, its slogans are quite often changing. In the 2000s, their 'Thanda Matlab Coca-Cola' campaign with Amir Khan was worth noticing. In 2012, they launched their 'Open Happiness' campaign with Coke. In between, they had three more slogans, namely 'Piyo Sar Uthake', 'Jo Chaheho Jaye Coca-Cola Enjoy' and 'Burrrrrr'. Slogans are sometimes paired with jingles, a short tune used in advertising. Like slogans, jingles must be catchy and memorable and create familiarity and desire for the product. Many of us hear a jingle on the radio or television, and it gets into our heads, and the effect is long-lasting. Jingles are one of the classic examples of sound branding. Many times, companies also use mascots in advertising campaigns. Mascots are a highly visible part of the brand and can take the advertising campaign to the next level. They give the brand a personality. While designing mascots, one has to ensure that the image is associated with the brand image. The most important legal shield for brands is trademarks. These can be symbols, logos, words, or slogans. Companies register them and create ownership and exclusive rights to use them. Companies may extend trademark protection to packaging, colours, numerals, shape of goods, smell, sound, movement, and holograms. It is anything that distinguishes one company's goods from another. Anybody who infringes them can be taken to court.
16.7.6 USP
Unique Selling Proposition or Unique Selling Point is a marketing concept which Rosser Reeves introduced. It can be a real or perceived benefit that customers seek from the product more than that of its competitor. The purpose of having a USP is that the target audience must be convinced of the reason to buy a product. This proposition must be something other marketers have not yet claimed; only your product is offered or claimed to be offered first. Generally, the advertising campaign is built around USP. Check Your Progress: 5 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. What are the steps involved in the information processing model:

2. What is USP?

Interactive Media

3. Expand AIDA and DAGMAR:

4. What do you mean by brand?

5. Fill in the blanks:
a. A well-designed logo enhances the and gives a unique identity to the product. b. is a watchword, short, catchy phrase, or motto used in advertising, generally along with the logo. c. A short tune used in advertising is called d. While designing mascots, one has to ensure that the image is happy and colours are used. e. provides legal shield to the brands.
16.8 THE ADVERTISING MANAGEMENT
PROCESS
16.8.1 Advertising Strategy
A company's advertising strategy should always support its marketing strategy and the company plans. When doing strategic planning, advertisers need to be creative and flexible. A rigid strategy may often lead to loss of market share. One may use push or pull techniques to set the strategies depending on the business's goals. Strategic planning goes through the following steps:
16.8.1.1 Setting Objectives
The first and foremost step in strategic planning is setting objectives. Objectives are statements that explain what needs to be attained by taking advantage of opportunities and overcoming any barriers. When setting objectives, advertisers need to understand the goal of the campaign. Depending on the company's goals, objectives can be short-term or long- term. Short-term objectives focus on customers' actions, i.e., on the purchase, and long-term objectives focus on change in brand attitude. These objectives are further classified as direct and indirect. Direct objectives focus on increased sales, new distribution channel development, and profitability, whereas indirect objectives focus on changing attitudes and increasing awareness.

16.8.1.2 Formulating Budget Advertising
Literacy The advertising budget is one of the important components of the marketing budget. Advertisers must first analyse the expected results and only invest in any campaign. Campaign goals and objectives must be first determined, and the budget should be set accordingly. A well-planned budget helps in the effective utilisation of funds and avoids wastage. There are different techniques for setting the ad budget, which are discussed below: * Based on previous years' expenditure on advertising. * Percentage of sales technique: here, advertisers assess the annual sales and then set a budget. * The advertisers set an equal budget at par with the competition, meaning whatever the competition spends is equal to the advertisers' budget. * In an objective-based budget, advertisers first consider the available funds and cut the number of objectives or prioritise them according to the existing funds.
16.8.1.3 Creating Advertising Messages
Designing an advertising message is considered the most creative part of the campaign. Creativity has no limitations; therefore, messages can be designed in multiple ways beyond imagination. One has to take cues from the objectives to write a precise message.
16.8.1.4 Selecting Media and Vehicles
Selecting media and vehicles is also known as 'media scheduling'. It is a strategic process where media planners do a lot of research before making final decisions. The key here is to choose the most cost-effective media to reach the focused target audience. Media planners make a 'media mix' as their customised recipes when needs arise. Media mix simply means the right combination of each medium to reach its target audiences. The choice of media can be from print (newspapers, magazines and direct mail) and electronic media (radio, television, and Internet). While preparing media mix, one has to check these simple tips: * Optimum utilisation of your resources: Try to make a mix that will reach as large an audience as possible while reducing wastage. * Reach with high frequency: Constantly making your presence felt will have a high register and recall value. * Know your customer: Understand his/her media consumption for better reach. * Do your homework: Research well before going on the floor. The duration and timing of the advertising campaign need to be strategically planned for campaign success. Check reach and coverage, the cost of the media vehicles, the nature of your product, business goals, campaign goals, and your audience profile.

Participation in * More money spent will not always ensure the success of the advertising
Interactive Media
campaign. * Negotiate with media houses for competitive prices.
16.8.2 Strategy Implementation
Once an effective plan is made, it needs to be carefully executed, and that is when strategic implementation comes into the picture. Any organisation is people-oriented, and any strategy cannot be executed without the active involvement of the organisation's employees. The second step is to assess the budget requirements and match them with strategy implementation. Then, assign roles and responsibilities to designated people and, most importantly, give them deadlines. Put simply, have a meticulous communication plan ready before implementation.
16.8.3 Assessing Advertising Effectiveness
Measuring and evaluating advertising effectiveness is extremely important not only for the current campaign but also gives direction for all future campaigns. The ultimate goal of any advertising is to assist the sales team in increasing sales or help the marketing team increase brand awareness. This is measured by calculating R3: Reach, resonance and reaction. Reach is the penetration of your advertisement amongst your target audience. Resonance will tell you how effectively and qualitatively you have reached them. Reaction is how your target responds to your message. Check Your Progress: 6 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. Name different types of advertising budget settings.

2. What is media mix?

3. R3 stands for:

16.9 LET US SUM UP Advertising
Literacy In this unit, we discussed the basic principles and practices of advertising. We learned about key concepts commonly used in the advertising business and tried to learn about the prime objectives, advantages, and limitations of advertising. Advertising cannot reach people without mass media tools, so we reviewed various media vehicles and examined their strengths and weaknesses. We also learned about the techniques and appeals used in ads to understand advertising in depth. We tried discussing a few important advertising models followed by the advertising management process, which gave us an overview of strategy planning, setting a budget, implementing, and assessing effectiveness. Through these basic dimensions of advertising, you should be able to glance through various forms of promotional and commercial advertising contents in a critical manner.
16.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Arbaiza, F., Robledo-Dioses, K., & Arana, G. L. (2024). Advertising
Literacy: 30 Years in Scientific Studies. Comunicar: Revista Cientifica
de Comunicacion y Educacion, (78), 166-178.2. Eagle, L. (2007). Commercial media literacy: What does it do, to
whom--and does it matter?. Journal of Advertising, 36(2), 101-110.3. Erdem, M. N. (2020). An argumentative study on digital advertising
literacy. In Handbook of Research on Multidisciplinary Approaches to
Literacy in the Digital Age (pp. 160-178). IGI Global.
4. Koltay, T. (2011). The media and the literacies: Media literacy,
information literacy, digital literacy. Media, culture & society, 33(2), 211-221.5. Malmelin, N. (2010). What is advertising literacy? Exploring the
dimensions of advertising literacy. Journal of Visual Literacy, 29(2), 129-142.6. Naderer, B., & Opree, S. J. (2021). Increasing advertising literacy to
unveil disinformation in green advertising. Environmental Communication, 15(7), 923-936.7. Sadaba, C., & Feijoo, B. (2024). The Ethical and Moral Dimension of
Advertising Literacy. In Advertising Literacy for Young Audiences in
the Digital Age: A Critical Attitude to Embedded Formats (pp. 117-126). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
8. Wang, Y., Salim, N. A. M., & Subri, S. (2023). The Conceptual
Frameworks of Advertising Literacy: A Systematic Literature Review.
International Journal of Academic Research in Economics and
Management Sciences, 12(3).

Participation in 16.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Interactive Media
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. A. Three advantages of advertising to customers are that it informs about
product availability, helps customers make purchase decisions, and improves their standard of living.
B. Three disadvantages of advertising are that customers purchase
unnecessarily, it increases product price, and advertisements may be false and misleading.
2. A. General objectives are to inform, to persuade and to remind.
B. The objectives are to induce trial, intensify usage, sustain preference,
confirm image, change habits, and build a line of acceptance. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Print, television, radio, online and new media, outdoor, direct mail,
telemarketing, film, and window display.
2. Understanding advertising literacy involves grasping four key
dimensions: informational literacy, aesthetic literacy, rhetoric literacy, and promotional literacy. Informational literacy pertains to the ability to discern the accuracy and relevance of the information presented in advertisements. Aesthetic literacy involves analysing the visual and sensory aspects of advertisements, including design elements and emotional appeals. Rhetoric literacy focuses on recognizing the persuasive techniques used in advertisements, such as persuasion through language and imagery. Lastly, promotional literacy involves understanding the economic motives behind advertisements, including recognizing when an advertisement aims to sell a product or influence consumer behaviour. By comprehending these dimensions, individuals can critically evaluate advertisements and make informed decisions as consumers. Check Your Progress: 3
1. (a) Above the Line (b) Below the Line (c) Through the Line
2. In Integrated marketing communication campaigns, marketers blend both
above-the-line and below-the-line techniques, i.e. they use mass media tools along with public relations, direct mail, sales promotions and personal selling to reach their target customers. Check Your Progress: 4
A. Scarcity
B. Slice of life
C. Bandwagon
D. Adventure
E. Weasel words

Check Your Progress: 5 Advertising
Literacy
1. Exposure, attention, comprehension, acceptance, retention.
2. Unique Selling Proposition is a marketing concept which can be a real or
perceived benefit that customers seek from the product compared to its competitors and the target customers must be convinced of the proposition to buy the product.
3. AIDA stands for Attention, Interest, Desire, and Action, and DAGMAR
stands for Defining Advertising Goals for Measured Advertising Results.
4. A brand is a name, term, design, symbol, or combination intended to
identify the goods and services of one seller or group of sellers and differentiate them from competitors.
5. (a) Brand value (b) Slogan (c) Jingle (d) Bright (e) Trademarks
Check Your Progress 6
1. Based on previous years' advertising expenditures, the percentage of
sales technique is at par with the competition, and the budget is objective-based.
2. The right combination of media to reach the target audience.
3. Reach, resonance and reaction.


======================================================================
=== SOURCE: Unit-Format & guidelines.pdf ===
======================================================================

Brief Note on the Format of Units
Dr. Kiron Bansal
While writing a Unit in Self Learning Material (SLM) format, the Course writers may like to keep the following points in mind:
Word Limit
The length of each Unit is 5000 - 6000 words or approximately 25 word-processed A-4 size pages in view of the considerations of pedagogy, uniformity and printing. Style The units have to be written by the course writers in their own words in conversational style in simple English. The use of personal pronouns such as 'you', 'we' builds interactivity in the learning material to give the feel as if the teacher is speaking to the learner through his/her writing.
Unit Structure
The unit structure is a detailed itemization of the content broken into sections and subsections. It displays structural relations within the content to help the learners overview the text and locate relevant parts efficiently (Annexure 1). Introduction A brief introduction introduces the subject matter and the scheme of contents. It establishes the connections of the unit with the previous as well as the next unit. Objectives The objectives of each unit have to be stated clearly in behavioural terms so that they are observable and measurable. Some examples of behavioural verbs are: define, describe, explain, list, select, state, compare, differentiate, identify, distinguish, summarise, illustrate, outline etc. (Annexure 2)
Main Body of the Unit
The main body of the unit includes the content in the form of sections and subsections with suitable headings and sub-headings. Usually each section relates to a different objective of the unit, presents at least one new point and helps the learner to move from one point to another. These points are followed by self check questions given at the end of each section. The content may be interspersed with examples, illustrations and case studies to explain the concepts/issues discussed in the unit. Case studies can be given separately in appendix.
Self Check Questions
Self check questions are related to the objectives of a unit and serve pedagogic functions as they break monotony and motivate the learner to participate in learning. These are, however, not sent to the University for assessment. Possible answers of the questions are given at the end of the unit to provide feedback to the learners and indicate that they are on the right path. Answers are based on what has been discussed and do not fall outside the scope of the unit.

Activities Some activities also need to be given in the unit to involve the learner. These activities may be based on the subject matter of the unit, further readings and sources. The learners can also be asked to read/write or view/listen or analyse a report/news item (Annexure 3). Graphics Graphics such as line drawings, diagrams, charts, graphs, flow charts, cartoons etc. have to be indicated in the text. For any such requirement, appropriate art work can be arranged by the University. Summary In summary, important issues discussed in the unit are recapitulated at the end for reinforcement. Glossary/Key words The keywords, new concepts, difficult terms and technical expressions discussed in the unit which need elaboration may be included in glossary (Annexure 4).
Citations, References & Further Readings
Since we do not follow the system of footnotes, a brief list of references may be provided at the end of the unit. Whenever an authority is quoted the source need to be properly cited. The books recommended for Further Readings should be easily available at reasonable prices. The name of the author, year of publication, title of the book, publisher, place of publication and chapter needs to be mentioned. References of the relevant websites may also be given. If the course writer feels that a published article or chapter from existing material should be made available to the learners as additional readings, the same may be indicated with complete references so that we may obtain copyright of the material and send it to our students.
Copyright Issues
Care needs to be taken while quoting from published or unpublished material - a maximum of 100 words may be quoted giving complete references and citations of the quoted work. If the quoted text, however, is more than 100 words, the course writer may either take written permission from the author or inform the Programme Coordinator giving complete references of the work so that we may obtain written permission to use the material otherwise it can fall under plagiarism. Similarly, if an already published map/photograph/news clipping/report/writing etc. needs to be included in the course material; a photocopy of the same with complete reference may be sent to us. We shall obtain requisite copyright permissions and get proper art work made for any such requirement.
Block Introduction
The Course Writer writing all the units of a block needs to prepare the Block Introduction in which various units of the block have to be briefly introduced and their linkages with each other as well as the next block established (Annexure 5).

Annexure 1
1.0 DESIGNING AUDIO VIDEO MATERIALS
Unit Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Objectives
1.2 Instructional Design for Audio and Video
1.2.1 Needs Assessment
1.2.2 Selection of Topic
1.2.3 Defining Learning Objectives and Scope
1.2.4 Team Work
1.3 Content Planning for Audio-Video
1.3.1 Research
1.3.2 Content Development
1.4 Design Considerations for Media
1.4.1 Elements of Audio and Video
1.4.2 Format Selection
1.4.3 Writing for Media
1.4.4 Assessment
1.5 Designing Interactivity
1.6 Learning Attributes of Audio and Video
1.7 Let Us Sum Up
1.8 Unit End Exercises
1.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
1.10 References

Annexure 2
Objectives in Behavioural Terms
Objectives in Instructional Terms Objectives in Behavioural Terms
Knows Defines, describes, identifies, labels, outlines, reproduces, selects, states, lists. Understands Converts, defends, distinguishes, estimates, explains, extends, generalizes, gives examples, infers, paraphrases, predicts, rewrites, summarizes. Learns Changes, computes, demonstrates, discovers, manipulates, modifies, operates, predicts, prepares, produces, relates, shows, solves, uses. Analyses Breaks down, diagrams, differentiates, distinguishes identifies, illustrates, infers, outlines, points out, relates, selects, separates, subdivides, categorizes. Synthesises Combines, compiles, composes, explains, generates, modifies, organizes, rearranges, revises, rewrites, summarizes, writes. Judges Appraises compares, concludes, contrasts, criticizes, describes, discriminates, explains, justifies, interprets, relates, summarizes. Source: IGNOU Handbook 5, Self- Instructional Course Units (1989), Division of Distance Education, Indira Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi.

Annexure 3
Some Examples of Activities
Activity 1 We are sure, you must be an avid listener of radio programmes. Think of some of the programmes on radio that you like and try to identify their formats. At this point, do not worry about the accuracy of what you have written as you will be able to review it after reading this section.
Programme Format
Activity 2 Organize a mock radio interview or discussion with your friends/acquaintances. Identify the target audience for your programme and the duration. Record it on a cassette recorder and analyze the strengths and weaknesses of the programme. Activity 3 Visit the nearest radio station, which has a News Wing. Observe the various steps involved in compiling a news bulletin. Activity 4 You would have heard the word 'development' so often. In the space provided below, write what you understand by the word 'development'.

In your village/locality/area, what are the main issues and problems which you think need immediate attention so that development may take place. Mention three such problems/issues and give reasons as to why you think they are urgent.

Activity 5 This Indonesian project (discussed in the unit) is very interesting. In India too, we have a large number of rag-pickers. As a member of an NGO if you are asked to plan a communication strategy for the rag-pickers of your city, what steps will you keep in mind while planning the strategy? Activity 6 Identify one topic each for audio and video keeping in view the strengths and limitations of each medium. Give reasons for your selection. Activity 7 Suggest appropriate sound effects and music for the following situations:
Situations Elements
Establish a bad character Express anguish Dusk time in village Scene of a railway station Activity 8 You would have read a book recently on print media/radio/television/web media. Give your views on the book in about 150 words highlighting its usefulness for the students of mass communication. Activity 9 Attend a public function organized in your area. Write a report in about 300 words for a local newspaper giving suitable headline. Activity 10 Collect two articles published in a newspaper or magazine on the theme discussed in the unit. Identify the various issues highlighted by the authors for a holistic understanding of the issue.

Annexure 4
4.8 Key Words
Behaviourists : A school of thought in psychology that viewed animals and human behaviour in terms of external process only (stimulus-response theory). Language was believed to be a matter of habit formation and imitation and errors were seen as bad habits. Multilingualism : The use of more than two languages by an individual or a community Reinforcement : This is a stimulus which leads to a response either occurring or not occurring again. Structuralists : A school of thought in linguistics which stressed the importance of language as a system where units such as sounds, words, sentences were viewed as structured within the system. L1 : Usually your mother tongue/ first language which you acquire. L2 : Language which is learnt as a second language like English in India.