MNM - 034
Mobile Journalism
MOBILE JOURNALISM

Disclaimer: Any materials and images adapted from web-based resources in this self-learning course material are being used for educational purposes only and not for commercial purposes.
PROGRAMME COORDINATOR: PROF. K.S. ARUL SELVAN
BLOCK 1
Unit 1 Dr. Aakanksha Sharma Unit 3 & Dr. Sujeet kumar
& 2 13
Programme Specialist Internews Assistant Professor Department of
India Jaipur Mass Communication and Media
Central University of South Bihar
(formerly Central University of
Bihar), Gaya, Bihar
Unit 4 Dr. Sudarshan Yadav Unit 6 Dr. Guna Graciyal
& 5 & 7
Assistant Professor, Department PG Department of Journalism
of Journalism and Mass and Communication, Dwaraka
Communication, Central Doss Goverdhan Doss Vaishnav
University of Jharkhand, Ranchi College, Arumbakkam, Chennai
Unit 8 Adopted from MAJMC of Unit 9 & Dr. Huma Parveen
SOCIS, IGNOU 14
Assistant Professor Department
of Mass Communication Aligarh
Muslim University, Aligarh
Unit 10 Dr. Abhay Chawla Unit 11 Arushi Bhatnagar
Assistant Professor Script Writer and RJ
Department of Media Studies, Radio Madhuban, Mount Abu,
GGSIP University, New Delhi, Rajasthan
Unit 12 Dr. Kritika Agrawal
Assistant Professor
Department of Mass
Communication
Babu Banarasi Das University,
Lucknow
PRINT PRODUCTION
Mr. Sanjay Agarwal
Assistant Registrar, MPDD
IGNOU, New Delhi
July, 2024 (c) Indira Gandhi National Open University, 2024
ISBN:
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced in any form, by mimeograph or any other means, with- out permission in writing from the Indira Gandhi National Open University. Laser typeset by: Akashdeep Printer Printed at :

COURSE CONTENTS
MNM-034 MOBILE JOURNALISM
BLOCK 1 MOBILE AND SOCIETY Page No.
Unit 1 Mobile As A Medium 11
Unit 2 Mobile Nations: Access And Reach 25
Unit 3 Mobile And News Media 37
Unit 4 Benefits Of Mobile Journalism 58
Unit 5 Mobile News Consumption Patterns 76
BLOCK 2 UNDERSTANDING MOJO
Unit 6 Landscape Of Mobile Journalism 101
Unit 7 Mobile Multimedia Basics 117
Unit 8 Introduction To Mobile Apps 131
Unit 9 Apps For Mojo 144
Unit 10 Mobile Journalism Equipment 165
BLOCK 3 MOBILE JOURNALISM PRODUCTION PROCESS
Unit 11 Reporting With Smartphones 187
Unit 12 Scripting For Mojo Stories 202
Unit 13 Mobile News Packaging 217
Unit 14 Mobile Editing And Production 234

MNM034 COURSE INTRODUCTION: MOBILE
JOURNALISM
India is considered a mobile nation, with nearly 94% of the population accessing telecom connectivity. With the increasing Internet usage through mobile gaining traction in the country, many media houses have already started incorporating mobile-based news operations. Popularly, it is called MOJO for mobile journalism; in this course, we have invariably used Mojo for mobile journalism. Since it is handy and capable of helping many of us generate multimedia content, it is noteworthy to fine-tune our understanding of this generic knowledge for journalistic practices. With this background information, this course, Mobile Journalism, comprises 14 Units segmented under three distinctive blocks. In Block 1, Introduction: Mobile and Society, we introduce the concept of mobile technology in contemporary society, mainly focusing on India's dynamic landscape. Unit 1 provides the groundwork by examining mobile communication as a multifaceted medium, exploring its characteristics, advantages, and legal considerations while analysing its societal implications, especially in journalism. Unit 2 analyses the transformative force of mobile connectivity, reshaping how we access information and navigate our daily lives globally. In Unit 3, we scrutinise the symbiotic relationship between mobile technology and news dissemination in India, where smartphones are gaining supreme as the primary source of news consumption. Unit 4 highlights Mobile Journalism (MoJo), revolutionising news production and consumption through innovative storytelling methods facilitated by mobile devices. Finally, Unit 5 explores the dynamic landscape of mobile news consumption, highlighting its pivotal role as the sixth mass media and its implications for society's information consumption habits and media landscape. In this Block, you will gain a nuanced understanding of mobile technology's pervasive influence and its implications for contemporary society. In Block 2, Understanding Mojo, we examine how smartphones have metamorphosed from mere communication devices into indispensable tools for news dissemination. Unit 6 sets the stage by dissecting the Landscape of Mobile Journalism, discussing its structure and profound impact on the media landscape. From traditional news gathering to citizen journalism, you will explore the symbiotic relationship between users and their devices, navigating through emerging technologies and social media integration. In Unit 7, Mobile Multimedia Basics, the focus shifts to mobile multimedia's fundamental components and dynamics, examining audio, video, and graphics and their integration with cloud computing. Unit 8 introduces you to Mobile Applications, tracing their evolution and impact on various domains. In contrast, Unit 9, "Apps for MoJo," equips you with practical skills in mobile journalism, exploring diverse app categories for modern storytelling. Unit 10, Mobile Journalism Equipment, provides insights into essential tools and techniques, emphasising innovation and adaptability in this dynamic field. Block 3: Mobile Journalism Production Process, In this Block, we explore its transformative impact on journalism. Unit 11 discusses the pivotal role of smartphones in reshaping news gathering and dissemination, navigating through

the intricacies of smartphone reporting and ethical considerations. Unit 12 sheds light on the revolutionary shift in Mobile Journalism stories, especially in crises, and unravels the art of scriptwriting tailored for MoJo narratives. Moving forward, Unit 13 explains the nuances of mobile news packaging, equipping students with skills in small-screen storytelling, multimedia integration, and ethical digital reporting practices. Unit 14 underscores the significance of mobile editing and production skills, empowering journalists to harness the full potential of their devices for impactful storytelling and media dissemination in the ever-evolving landscape of contemporary journalism. With mobile devices becoming an integral part of many people's lives, this course will give you a space to learn the intricacies of Mobile Journalism and equip you with essential skills for navigating this dynamic landscape.

BLOCK 1
MOBILE AND SOCIETY

BLOCK 1 INTRODUCTION: MOBILE AND
SOCIETY
In the traditional mass communication degree programme, mainstream media occupies a significant curriculum focus. However, in the past two decades, that scenario has changed dramatically. We started engaging with the mobile medium more intimately than newspapers, television, or radio. Actually, we started receiving and reading news through various apps and having opportunities to watch important events through streaming Apps. In this Block, you will understand the whole gamut of mobile technology as a communication medium and its relationships and associations with individuals, communities, and social sectors.
Unit 1: Mobile as a Medium, In an era where mobile phones are omnipresent,
especially in India with its staggering number of connections, this Unit is a comprehensive exploration of mobile communication as a medium. From understanding its characteristics to assessing its advantages and disadvantages, you will explore the complexities of mobile technology. Legal considerations, safety protocols, and the evolving landscape of mobile journalism will be scrutinised, equipping learners with a nuanced understanding of this ubiquitous medium and its societal implications. Through this Unit, you will develop a holistic understanding of mobile communication, empowering them to navigate its intricacies responsibly and effectively.
Unit 2: Mobile Nations, In this Unit, we will learn the landscape of mobile
connectivity, a ubiquitous force shaping our digital society. At its core, mobile connectivity revolutionises how we access information, communicate, and navigate our daily lives. We are browsing the Internet seamlessly through smartphones and tablets, enabling various activities from entertainment to education, banking to agriculture. This Unit begins by examining the global mobile scenario and highlighting the significance of access and its multifaceted implications. We'll understand the advantages of high mobile penetration while dissecting its challenges, accompanied by thoughtful solutions.
Unit 3: Mobile and News Media, we will discuss the relationship between
mobile technology and news dissemination in India. With smartphones dominating the landscape, constituting 72% of news consumption compared to 35% via computers, India is a paradigmatic "mobile-first" market for news. Popular apps like Google News, Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint exemplify the convenience and accessibility of curated content on mobile platforms. The transformative impact of mobile technology is underscored by the immediacy and accessibility it affords, reflected in concise formats like short articles, videos, and infographics catering to truncated attention spans.
Unit 4: Benefits of Mobile Journalism, we will explore Mobile Journalism
(MoJo), a transformative force in news production and consumption. Through the lens of mobile devices like smartphones and tablets, MoJo enables journalists to swiftly capture, edit, and share news content, revolutionising traditional practices. You will uncover the multifaceted benefits of MoJo for media institutions, newsrooms, professionals, consumers, and prosumers alike.

From facilitating real-time reporting to fostering audience engagement, MoJo's versatility empowers journalists to transcend geographical limitations and embrace innovative storytelling methods. Through platform-specific insights into photography, audio bytes/podcasts, and video bytes/streaming, you will grasp the profound impact of MoJo in shaping the contemporary landscape of journalism.
Unit 5: Apps for Mojo, we explore the dynamic landscape of mobile news
consumption. In today's digital age, imagine leisurely scrolling through your social media feed when suddenly a headline catches your eye, drawing you into the latest news article on your mobile device. Mobile news has transcended mere trend status to become the sixth mass media, offering customisable feeds, seamless social network integration, and instant updates anytime, anywhere. Through this Unit, we will explore mobile news consumption, analysing its impact on society, its challenges, and its future trajectory in the media landscape. Through handheld devices, we are connecting with the globe. That's the scenario currently attracting young audiences from mainstream media to Apps. Significant changes might change the gamut of the communication process in the long term. It will be quite interesting to examine this transformation through this course.

UNIT 1 MOBILE AS A MEDIUM
Structure
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Learning Outcomes
1.2 Characteristics of mobile as a medium
1.2.1 Mobile Generations and Characteristics
1.2.2 AR, VR, AI and Other Formats
1.3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Mobile Communication
1.4 Rights, Laws and Dangers
1.4.1 Dangers in the Mobile World
1.4.2 Mobile Gaming and Addiction
1.4. 3 Do's and Don'ts of Mobile Communication
1.5 News and Mobile Journalism (MoJo)
1.6 Let Us Sum Up
1.7 Keywords
1.8 Further Readings
1.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Mobile phones are everywhere. India has a staggering 1.10 billion mobile connections, representing 77% of the population. Over 90% of these use their mobile device to access the internet, spending Three hours 55 minutes to do so . In the year 2023, we had 692 million internet users in India. Of these, 467 million used social media. More than 398 million adults (40.2% of the 18+ population) used social media in 2023.2024 India will roll out a 5G connection to bolster rural connectivity and
mobile broadband. We are all familiar with the characteristics of a mobile. It is accessible (widely available), easy to use (user-friendly), immediate (fast, instant) and multi-purpose. Today, India is the second largest mobile telephony network after China. Internet Services (ITeS) delivered through mobile phones have enabled the government to use mobiles to double up as touch points in remote places where it is a challenge to reach the local community. This mass reach and availability of mobile phones has allowed it to become a preferred medium to access news and information, with 72% accessing news through smartphones and 35% via computers. Users spend around two hours and 50 minutes on social media out of every six hours and 23 minutes on the internet. The average time spent on mobile phone usage is four hours 51 minutes. There are 28.89 billion downloads of mobile apps in 2023 in India. It is not surprising

Mobile And Society that mobiles are gaining traction as a medium of storytelling among social media influencers, journalists and citizen journalists. The diversity of formats, easy accessibility and popularity of the mobile phone makes it an obvious choice for anyone with a story to share with the world.
1.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Develop an understanding of the characteristics of mobile as a medium; * Explore the advantages and disadvantages of using mobiles; * Examine the rights, laws and issues around using mobiles in India; * Learn about various techniques and steps to keep yourself safe while using mobiles; and * Comprehend the merits and demerits of mobile journalism.
1.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF MOBILE AS A
MEDIUM
1.2.1 Mobile Generations and Characteristics
Today, the mobile phone is not just an enabler of technology-led services; it allows people-to-people communication through voice, text and video. The mobile has transformed into a 'smartphone'. From its humble beginnings in 1997, when the Swedish telephone manufacturer Ericsson first used the term to introduce its new device, it has been transformed repeatedly. Now, we can access various services such as banking, financial transactions and social media through smartphones. However, not all mobiles are smartphones. Most cell phones are feature phones. A feature phone is usually non-touch based and may have a simple display, limited internet access capabilities and longer battery life. They may have a camera, a radio and simple games. The technology behind the smartphone is simple. A mobile device is programmed to catch a mobile network and allow users to access services via the internet or mobile networks. While phones were previously 2G or 3G, newer models are 4G and 5G. The very first form of data to be transferred over mobiles was voice. The first phones could merely be used for talking to one another. The second generation or 2G phones from 1991 could share SMS, pictures and MMS with speeds of up to 50 KBPS. The third and most advanced generation, the 3G, came in 1998 and significantly increased internet speeds to 2 MBPS 3G enabled voice calling and the mobile internet access you see today. However, 4G, or the fourth generation of networking, was launched in 2008 and facilitated mobile gaming, mobile television, video conferencing, and GPS with up to 1 GBPS speeds. Today, 5th-generation mobile technology has been made available in India. The government can launch many services using technologies such as smartphone-based authentication for daily wage earners and RuPay (an electronic payment system that includes credit and debit cards and UPI payments).

Regardless of the specifics, both features and smartphones have some common Mobile As A Medium characteristics.
1. Portable and wireless, they can be carried easily from place to place,
making it easier to access voice and instant messages regardless of location. (The catch is that you must be in an area that receives mobile signals.)
2. Instant/Immediate: While media such as newspapers and magazines take
some time to reach their audiences, digital versions can reach the user instantly.
3. Versatile: Mobiles can access basic facilities such as banking alerts and
social media, as well as entertainment such as audio, radio, and videos.
4. Multimedia: Mobiles can create audio messages and videos and capture
images.
5. Easy to use: Most phones are user-friendly and simple to use. However,
most new users find it challenging to use new devices as they offer a range of features.
1.2.2 AR, VR, AI and Other Formats
During the COVID pandemic, upticks were observed in the usage of mobile phones as many schools and colleges shifted 'online'. You are familiar with online learning. Mobile phones are a great medium to access online resources such as journals, books, videos, and textbooks. Enhancements such as Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) help students access simulations like never before. In simple language, VR is like entering a virtual zone or a game. If you need to understand what a Tsunami feels like, you can watch videos, but if you want to really 'feel' what a person being hit by a Tsunami feels like, you can use VR. VR will make you feel that you are 'in' that place as opposed to feeling like you are watching it from the outside. VR is a great way to understand what an expedition to the Antarctic will look like and has a lot of applications in education. Augmented reality is a tool that can be used to add new layers to your actual environment. You must have used apps to see how a painting or decoration will look in your room. It would help if you point your phone camera anywhere in your room, and the software will show you what the wall would look like with that painting. You can also enhance your pictures using filters before posting them on social media. The original image remains there but has been enhanced using AR technology. 5G technology will enable these on smartphones. While these are great uses of technology, other developing technologies, such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), can also be dangerous. AI attempts to make machines think like humans and accomplish basic tasks by learning from their experience rather than computer programs. You may have seen some science fiction movies like Robot or RaOne. Voice search on your phone, personalised display recommendations on YouTube according to your search history, and navigation alerts on Google Maps are all based on AI data analysis. However, some negative actors can use AI for voice cloning. This is done using software that analyses your voice by hacking into your cellphone or 13

Mobile And Society using videos you share online and replicating the voice. The contacts in your phone book may receive calls from your duplicate voice, and they might be tricked into believing that you are in danger and need money. They could steal your identity and make fake claims using deep fakes or doctored images. It is important to understand the advantages and disadvantages of mobiles so that they can be used safely and effectively. Activity 1: List five features or apps you use most frequently from your mobile phone. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are the characteristics of a mobile phone?

2. What do you understand about AR, VR, and AI?

1.3 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
MOBILE COMMUNICATION
Mobile phones are everywhere. They bring with them an unparalleled ease of use and familiarity. We can quickly upload any information instantly in a minute, and it can go worldwide within a few minutes. Even though it is a blessing, it has a negative side. We get thousands of messages every day. Misinformation and disinformation abound on social media platforms that are now immediately accessible to the wider public. While misinformation is wrong information shared by mistake, disinformation is a malicious piece of information shared to harm the player's reputation. You must have received a media message on social media messaging apps that later turned out to be fake or propaganda against some groups or individuals. These messages could be an honest mistake or an intentional attack on someone's reputation. Sometimes, satire is mistaken for news. Many jokes, parody pieces and memes are believed to be true. Just as we lock our belongings while travelling, we should also lock our personal information such as date of birth, Aadhar number, bank account details, and sensitive personal pictures while using the internet. We have all heard about unsuspecting individuals scammed by telecallers claiming to be bank officials or clicking links without verifying them. We have also seen people get trapped by malicious individuals who hack phones, steal

identities or blackmail individuals once they possess intimate details from Mobile As A Medium someone's life. This happens because of low media literacy levels. Media literacy is the ability to distinguish between fake and real information and make sense of media messages we see daily. These messages could be a fraud SMS, a scam email, a fake social media profile, or a suspicious website. Developing capabilities to handle the information we see daily is very important. The following table sums up the advantages and disadvantages of mobile phones.
Advantages Disadvantages
1 Portable: mobile phones Privacy Concerns: There are
provide a quick and easy way concerns about privacy and data of communicating with family, security, as phones can be hacked or friends, and colleagues and can infected with viruses. People could be carried everywhere. click pictures or shoot videos without consent.
2 Instant/Immediate Immediate: Messages sent using a
mobile device will reach the other end immediately, and there is a very limited option to remove the content shared. Our mistakes could cause loss of reputation, harm to others, and embarrassment for ourselves.
3 Versatile: Mobile phones serve Misinformation: Susceptible to
multiple purposes. They can misuse and misinformation be used as a camera, a GPS, a calendar, a music player, and more
4 Multimedia capabilities: They Technical challenges: New users
offer internet access, providing may face technical issues in using infinite information at your advanced devices as they increase in fingertips and integrate AR, VR complexity
and AI
5 Easy to use A lot of help is available online to
resolve technical issues, troubleshoot, etc., using a mobile device. However, the ease of use depends on the user's and the device's technical capabilities.
6 Emergency Services: In Distraction: They can be a
emergencies, mobile phones can major distraction due to constant be used to call for help. notifications, calls, and messages. There are both advantages and disadvantages to any technology. Prolonged use of mobiles can lead to health problems such as vision issues, hearing loss, and even mental health issues like anxiety and depression. Overuse could also lead to addiction. It is important to use mobile phones responsibly and be aware of

Mobile And Society these potential drawbacks while enjoying their benefits. One should develop media and digital literacy to engage and use the technology to its best. We need to be aware of the dangers and our legal rights. Activity 2: Give an example of misinformation that you have seen on your phone. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) What are the advantages and disadvantages of a mobile phone?

2) What is media literacy, and what are the consequences of having low media
literacy skills?

1.4 RIGHTS, LAWS AND DANGERS
We have rights as consumers and creators of content in India. While creating content on our phones and uploading it on social media or sharing it on chat apps, we are responsible for respecting copyrights and ensuring that the content is not hurtful to individuals and communities. As per the Punjab and Haryana High Court, incitement to violence on social media is equivalent to collecting men for waging war against the Government of India, as per section 122 of the Indian Penal Code. Similarly, clicking pictures of prohibited areas such as defence zones or restricted areas can incur a charge of trespassing and endangering the country's national security. Obscene and visually sensitive images can attract penalties and prison charges. We should be careful when storing and sharing information and mindful of what we capture on our cell phones. Any statement, act, video, or speech that could affect public tranquillity by creating fear among communities and individuals based on caste, religion, or language could lead to punishment under section 153A. Sharing video messages that you receive on your social media account could lead to jail terms. We must be extremely careful about our phone's technical settings, as most apps access our contact book, pictures, and even banking details on our cell phones. Connecting with public internet networks such as Wi-Fi at airports and bus stations can also affect the security of our devices if we are not careful.

As a content creator, mobiles facilitate citizens to report on issues important to Mobile As A Medium them and raise their voices on social media. These citizen reporters are now a formidable force, and journalists now depend on these reporters to get updates from war zones, hard-to-reach communities, and disaster zones. Mobile devices empower individuals to document events and voice their opinions on social media platforms. These citizen journalists have become powerful, providing real-time updates from conflict areas, remote communities, and disaster-stricken regions. Journalists increasingly rely on these citizen reporters for firsthand information. Numerous mobile applications and built-in features enable users to edit and instantly upload photos and videos, making mobile phones indispensable for modern-day storytelling and news reporting. This democratisation of news reporting has transformed the landscape of journalism, making it more inclusive and diverse. This service has enabled thousands to become social media influencers and share their stories. We had 50 thousand content creators with a followership between 10 to 50 thousand followers and more than 22 thousand creators that had under 10000 followers in the year 2023 .
1.4.1 Dangers in the Mobile World
Social media also brings a lot of dangers. Strangers can contact you and drop comments on your social media pages. Trolls (people leaving negative comments on your page) can affect your social image and mental well-being. Some of these dangers have been listed above. Targeted smear campaigns designed to spoil your reputation can be created using the pictures or personal information that you share on the internet. Hacking is also a real threat. Negative actors could hack into your mobile device and obtain information about your movements or bank details. While these are mistakes on the part of others, we could also cause inadvertent errors while using mobile phones. Sharing unverified information you received over social media that leads to fear, alarm, or unrest invites punishment of up to three years or a fine under section 505. Similarly, if it is determined that you have violated religious feelings by deliberately posting material that insults religious beliefs, you could be penalised with a three-year prison term or a fine under Section 295A. There are also other legal offences under the law, such as Defamation (Section
499) and criminal intimidation (Section 503). If you are a victim of any of these
offences, you can report them to the nearest cyber police station or the platform. Most platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, have mechanisms to remove offensive content and report fake profiles. Viral trends and videos have also resulted in safety concerns for some users. Clicking selfies or shooting videos at busy intersections and dangerous terrain can have untoward consequences. We should avoid becoming a part of such viral trends unless it is safe and healthy. We should be careful about uploading our information and pictures on random sites. Cyberbullying and online harassment are significant issues in today's digital age. Bullying that happens on social media or via mobile phones is aimed at scaring, angering and shaming individuals. It could take any form, such as online abuse, posting embarrassing pictures or videos or threatening people through messages. A severe form of

Mobile And Society online abuse could lead to online harassment. Most cyberbullies do not realise that they can be tracked easily by the police and platforms such as Facebook, etc. Such malpractices often cause a lot of anxiety and difficulty for those affected, but it is easy to seek help and get the culprits arrested.
1.4.2 Mobile Gaming and Addiction
Mobile gaming is another dimension of mobile phones that has not been discussed much. Mobile gaming and videos have become a huge segment of the mobile industry. There are around 480 million active online gamers in India, which is expected to generate revenue of USD 100 billion by the end of 2023. We also have 500 million people aged between 15-35 . This growth is attributed to increasing smartphone penetration, low rates of internet access and better devices .This has set India up to be one of the fastest-growing gaming markets in the world. There is an increase in professional gaming events and e-sports, as well as enhanced connectivity and advanced devices. Gaming and social media have created some negative effects together. Cell phone addiction is becoming an increasing problem. Cell phone addiction is defined as the inability of the affected person to give up using their phone. Doctors believe that people addicted to mobile phones behave similarly to people addicted to gambling. They cannot control their behaviour and feel compelled to use their phones. Feeling uneasiness and withdrawal when they are not able to use their phones creates physical issues such as irritability and anxiety. And much like gamblers, mobile phone addicts are unable to let go. They need to follow a strict 'de-addiction' regime under medical supervision. Low attention spans and physical symptoms due to smartphone addiction are dangerous but avoidable problems. There are some things we can do to prevent this situation from occurring. Removing time-consuming apps, such as games, social media, etc., from the phone can be helpful. Another useful technique is to eliminate notifications by changing your device settings. Some apps help monitor and reduce the time you spend on the device. Developing hobbies that do not involve using social media and mobile devices is important.
1.4.3 Do's and don'ts of Mobile Communication (etiquette
and safety) We can follow some good practices while using mobile phones and connecting to the internet to safeguard ourselves.
1. Always use a password for your mobile device.
2. Keep your social media profiles locked, and avoid putting intimate personal
information such as pictures or other identifiers on social media.
3. Avoid downloading unrated and potentially malicious apps. Only authorised
apps should be downloaded from the Play Store, according to your device's configuration.
4. Refrain from clicking any links from unknown senders in emails or mobile
messages.

5. Never share personal information such as ATM card PIN details and Mobile As A Medium
banking passwords with strangers, even if they claim to be bank officials.
6. Do not share any information or forward social media messages without
verification unless you know the message's authenticity.
7. Ensure you do not post offensive or hurtful content that could incite
violence or hurt religious sentiments.
8. It is useful to seek consent from people when you are recording them or
their voices and images.
9. If your mobile device is stolen or hacked, ensure you can delete the data
remotely.
10. If you receive messages from fake social media profiles or unknown
individuals, please block their accounts and inform the platforms about these suspicious accounts.
11. Frequently change passwords and never keep identical passwords for all
your accounts.
12. When switching from one device to another, always clean your data
completely from the previous device.
13. Ensure you use copyright-free content, such as music or pictures, when
creating content online. Copyright violations often result in legal hassles, and platforms tend to shut down posts and channels that are found to violate copyright.
14. When connecting with public Wi-Fi networks, always use an anti-virus that
can help prevent malicious codes from being dropped onto your phones.
15. Be extremely cautious when conducting online money transfers.
Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Give some examples of laws that keep us safe online.

2. Who is a citizen reporter?

3. What good practices can we follow to keep ourselves safe online?

1.5 NEWS AND MOBILE JOURNALISM
Today, the ease of use of mobile phones has made it a popular choice even in mainstream newsrooms. Gone are the days when journalists carried heavy equipment, recorded videos and edited them back in the studio. Today, journalists can record, edit and broadcast videos instantly using high-quality mobile phones. This stream of journalism, unsurprisingly called 'mobile journalism', is gaining popularity as many reporters have now started to use mobile devices to record videos and interviews, click pictures, or even do podcasts. This has many advantages; * Portable As mobile phones are easy to carry, journalists can now record videos from almost anywhere. There is no need for special equipment maintenance or additional crew such as cameramen. * Easier to use compared to cameras The phone's user-friendly nature makes it easier for a beginner to use. Anyone with a mobile phone can learn visual storytelling with ease. * Discreet Imagine you need to cover a story in a sensitive area, such as a war zone. The mobile phone can help you do your job quietly without bringing much attention to you. This type of reporting is especially useful if you are an investigative reporter and plan to interview sources quietly. * Social-first Whatever you record can be aired almost instantly. This brings immense power and responsibility because you can broadcast live from sensitive zones, and people can instantly receive your broadcast. This is useful in disaster zones and conflict-prone areas when you want to attract immediate attention to the situation. * Facilitates new formats of broadcasting The mobile phone allows you to instantly post a photo story, a simple video with basic editing, a voice dispatch or a 'podcast', and a graphic or a text report. It also allows you to update your story in real time. These changes allow you to choose more effective techniques for storytelling. * Cost-effective While a newspaper subscription involves some cost, most news websites are free. It is easy to access news and information and refer to multiple sites. * Participatory Mobile journalism allows citizens to participate in reporting by helping them contribute visuals--pictures, videos, and audio regarding matters of concern. This helps expose corrupt individuals and practices. Reporters can get support for their stories from common citizens if they cannot reach the place in time or 20 if the place they want to cover is inaccessible.

* Accessible Mobile As A Medium Anyone with a phone connecting to the internet can receive information instantaneously. It could be a fisherman out at sea looking for weather updates or a farmer trying to decide which crops to sow. You can access information even if you don't have a television connection or a newspaper subscription. Even senior citizens and persons with disabilities can access the internet and obtain desired information through enhanced settings such as text-to-speech and enlarging the font size on their devices. Another good point is the customizability. The mobile device you use captures your choices and preferences throughout the day. This helps news organisations to give you personalised news. If you only like sports and entertainment, setting up your news app to show you those news pieces is possible. Thus, mobile journalists are not just faster but also creative and understand the medium well. They can bring attention to topics and issues that still need to be addressed by news channels and newspapers. A mobile journalist could use numerous storytelling methods, such as AR, VR, interviews, podcasts, video stories, or picture essays. Mobiles offer flexibility and agility to deliver the news quickly and in an accessible manner. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What are some advantages of mobile phones concerning news and
journalism?

2. What are the qualities needed in a mobile journalist?

1.6 LET US SUM UP
Mobile phones are ubiquitous, especially in India, with 1.10 billion mobile connections, representing 77% of the population. A significant majority of these users access the internet on their mobile devices. Mobile phones are easy to use and familiar, allowing instant information upload and dissemination. However, this ease of use also leads to the spread of misinformation and disinformation on social media platforms. The convenience of mobile phones has made them a popular tool in newsrooms, giving rise to 'mobile journalism'. Journalists can now instantly record, edit,

Mobile And Society and broadcast videos using high-quality mobile phones. This new form of journalism is gaining popularity, allowing for faster news delivery, creative storytelling, and coverage of underreported topics and issues. Mobile journalists can use various storytelling methods such as AR, VR, interviews, podcasts, video stories, or picture essays. Thus, mobile phones offer flexibility and agility in delivering news quickly and accessible. However, there are many dangers that we are exposed to when we go online. Voice cloning using AI-based tools, identity theft using malicious apps, and trolling through anonymous accounts are all too common in the mobile world. We need to be alert while spending time online. Everyone has the right to feel safe and respected online.
1.7 KEYWORDS
KBPS & MBPS: Kbps stands for kilobits per second (1000 bits per second) and measures data transfer speed. Mbps (megabits per second) and Gbps (gigabits per second) are commonly used today. GPS: GPS stands for Global Positioning System. It's a satellite-based radio navigation system that provides geolocation and time information. PIN: Personal Identification Number: In banking or security, a PIN is a unique code used to verify the user's identity and secure financial transactions when using a credit or debit card. MMS and SMS: MMS stands for Multimedia Messaging Service.MMS extends the core SMS (Short Message Service) capability, allowing the exchange of text messages greater than 160 characters in length. Unlike text-only SMS, MMS can deliver a variety of media, including up to forty seconds of video, one image, a slideshow of multiple images, or audio. The most common use involves sending photographs from camera-equipped handsets.
1.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Campbell, S. W. (2013). Mobile media and communication: A new field, or
just a new journal?. Mobile Media & Communication, 1(1), 8-13. https:// journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/2050157912459495
2. Frith, J., & Ozkul, D. (2019). Mobile media beyond mobile phones. Mobile
Media & Communication, 7(3), 293-302. https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/ cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1067&context=english_pubs
3. Green, N., & Haddon, L. (2009). Mobile communications: An introduction
to new media. Berg.
4. Jensen, K. B. (2022). Media convergence: The three degrees of network,
mass, and interpersonal communication. Routledge.
5. Ling, R., & Donner, J. (2013). Mobile communication. John Wiley & Sons.
6. Oksman, V. (2010). The mobile phone-A medium in itself. VTT. https://
trepo.tuni.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/66612/P737.pdf?sequence=1

7. Stald, G. (2008). Mobile identity: Youth, identity, and mobile communication Mobile As A Medium
media. MacArthur Foundation Digital Media and Learning Initiative. https://mediaimpact.issuelab.org/resources/865/865.pdf
8. Wei, R. (2013). Mobile media: Coming of age with a big splash. Mobile
media & communication, 1(1), 50-56. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/ pdf/10.1177/2050157912459494
1.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Characteristics of a mobile phone encompass portability, communication
capabilities through calls, texts, and internet access, diverse functionalities like camera, apps, and multimedia playback, compact size for easy handling, and battery-powered mobility. Additionally, modern smartphones integrate features such as GPS, sensors for various purposes, touchscreen interfaces, and connectivity options like Wi-Fi and Bluetooth. These devices serve as multifunctional tools facilitating not only communication but also entertainment, productivity, and access to information.
2. Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual Reality (VR), and Artificial Intelligence
(AI) represent advanced technologies shaping contemporary digital experiences. AR overlays digital content onto the real world, enhancing perception, while VR immerses users in simulated environments. AI involves machines performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as learning, problem-solving, and decision-making, often through algorithms and data analysis. These technologies revolutionise sectors like gaming, healthcare, education, and entertainment, offering innovative ways to interact with digital content and augment human capabilities. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Mobile phones offer unparalleled connectivity, enabling instant
communication, access to information, and enhanced productivity. They serve as multifunctional tools for work, education, and entertainment. However, their constant connectivity can lead to addiction, distraction, and reduced face-to-face interaction. Privacy concerns arise due to data breaches and surveillance. Excessive screen time may impact mental health, causing anxiety and sleep disturbances. Additionally, the digital divide exacerbates inequalities, as not everyone can afford or access mobile technology.
2. Media literacy refers to the ability to critically analyse, evaluate, and create
media messages. Low media literacy skills can result in susceptibility to misinformation, manipulation, and propaganda. Individuals may struggle to discern credible sources from unreliable ones, leading to distorted perceptions and uninformed decision-making. This can perpetuate societal divisions and hinder democratic discourse. Furthermore, lack of media literacy may contribute to the spread of false narratives and reinforce stereotypes. Developing media literacy empowers individuals to navigate the complex media landscape responsibly, fostering informed citizenship and safeguarding against manipulation.

Mobile And Society Check Your Progress: 3
1. Advantages of mobile phones in news and journalism include instant
reporting capabilities, enabling journalists to cover breaking news in real- time. Mobile phones offer multimedia functionalities, allowing for the capture of photos, videos, and audio recordings, enhancing storytelling. They facilitate direct engagement with audiences through social media platforms, fostering interactive journalism. Additionally, mobile phones are portable and ubiquitous, enabling journalists to work from anywhere, enhancing flexibility.
2. Qualities needed in a mobile journalist include adaptability to technological
advancements, proficiency in mobile reporting tools and apps, and strong storytelling skills to effectively convey news through multimedia formats. Mobile journalists should possess excellent communication abilities to engage with diverse audiences and navigate rapidly changing news landscapes. They should demonstrate creativity in utilising mobile technology to produce compelling and informative content. Moreover, a mobile journalist must exhibit resilience and quick decision-making skills to address challenges encountered in the field.

UNIT 2 MOBILE NATIONS
Structure
2.0 Introduction
2.1 Learning Outcomes
2.2 Overview of Mobile Connectivity
2.2.1 Global Mobile Scenario
2.3 What does Access Mean and Why it is Important
2.4 Advantages of High Mobile Penetration
2.5 Advantages of Being 'Mobile First'
2.6 Challenges and Solutions
2.7 Future Possibilities
2.8 Let Us Sum Up
2.9 Keywords
2.10 Further Readings
2.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
2.0 INTRODUCTION
You must be familiar with the smartphone. Smartphones are devices that provide internet access to users through mobile networks. We can use smartphones and tablets to connect to the Internet on the go. You can use it to access any information you like. Be it online gaming, watching videos, surfing the Internet, using social media, or finding locations using the navigation service. The mobile phone allows people to easily access banking, news, and information. Users can access entertainment apps and learn new things from the comfort of their homes or even while travelling. Mobile connectivity refers to the ability of devices to connect to the Internet and communicate with each other, mainly via cellular networks. The effects of mobile connectivity are pervasive and transcendental. It is used everywhere in healthcare, education, or space technology. The result is a society that can quickly progress by leveraging these benefits. For example, students can learn a foreign language, find translation jobs, and earn supplemental income using the correct apps. A farmer can use AI to predict which crops to grow and choose when to harvest using a mobile app. However, it is important to brace ourselves fully to deal with the challenges of this new environment by making ourselves digitally literate.
2.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to :

Mobile And Society * Understand the overview of mobile connectivity in the country and the world; * Examine the global trends and their implications as a user of mobile phones; * Perceive the benefits and disadvantages of being a mobile-first population; and * Protect yourself from online harms and dangers of the mobile world.
2.2 OVERVIEW OF MOBILE CONNECTIVITY
2.2.1 Global Mobile Scenario
As per the report 'State of Mobile Internet Connectivity 2023', the share of the global population living in areas without mobile broadband coverage stood at 5% by the end of 2022. The report states that almost 400 million people are still not covered by a mobile broadband network. Of the 3.4 billion people who remain unconnected to mobile Internet, nearly 90% (3 billion) live in an area already covered by mobile broadband but do not use mobile Internet services. With mobile internet adoption outpacing network expansion, this usage gap has been shrinking slowly, from 40% in 2021 to 38% in 2022. However, the usage gap remains almost eight times the size of the coverage gap. (p 13, THE STATE OF MOBILE INTERNET CONNECTIVITY 2023). At the beginning of 2023, India had about 692 million internet users, with a penetration rate of 48.7%. The penetration rate is calculated as a ratio between the total population and the number of SIM cards per country. It is estimated that 730 million people (over 51% of the population) were offline at the beginning of 2023. China is home to the most internet users (1.09 billion), 76.4 per cent of China's total population. Just 52.4 per cent of the population in India is connected to the Internet. We still have over 680 million offline in 2024 compared to China's 336 million. These numbers are also true for the world's highest number of smartphone users, with China boasting a staggering 974.69 million subscribers and India with around 659 million smartphone users. The penetration rate is the highest for Macao at 413%, while North Korea has the lowest internet penetration with a staggering zero per cent rate. Globally, we had nearly 8.9 billion mobile phone subscriptions in 2023, suggesting that 80 per cent of the world population now has a smartphone. Even though connectivity improved in 2021 due to the pandemic, only 31% of South Asian people were using mobile Internet on their phones by the end of 2022, while around 69% of people in Africa use mobile Internet. Globally, more than 60% of internet traffic comes from mobile phones. Mobile phones surpassed laptops and computers as preferred mediums for internet access for the first time in 2017. After that, we have seen a persistent rise in mobile-led traffic on the Internet. Today, around 61% of all global traffic on the Internet comes from mobile phones. Mobile adoption figures also vary region-wise. While it stands at 82% in North
26 America and 79% in Europe, the figure is much lower at 64% for Sub-Saharan

Africa (as of 2021). East Asia and the Pacific have the third highest levels Mobile Nations: of connectivity (with 71% of the region's population using mobile Internet) Access and Reach after North America and Europe & Central Asia. In the Pacific Islands, mobile internet adoption is much lower at 27%. There is a gap between people owning smartphones and accessing the Internet. In simple terms, not all people with internet-enabled phones use mobile Internet. This could be due to the high cost of internet access or poor connectivity. The Mobile Connectivity Index (MCI) ranks 170 countries against the four key enablers of mobile internet adoption: infrastructure, affordability, consumer readiness, and content and services on a scale of 1-100. While the infrastructure head indicates mobile network coverage, affordability means cheaply available Internet, and consumer readiness measures people's digital ability to use the Internet. Content relevance implies the ability of the population to access online content for informed decision-making. There could be several reasons for low internet penetration in countries: * Infrastructure: The Internet is difficult for hard-to-reach communities, such as those in Islands, hilly areas, and remote regions. * High cost of access or Affordability: Indian consumers have seen a drop in data prices, increasing mobile adoption. However, low internet speeds and high cost of phone devices can be an inhibiting factor when it comes to affordability. * Gender and other limiting factors: Women and other disadvantaged groups find it difficult to have the same opportunities to access the Internet. This is a global phenomenon and not restricted to less developed countries alone. * Media and digital literacy: As you know, the Internet can only show information you search for. If your search capabilities are restricted due to language or other barriers, you may not be able to locate the content you are looking for. This could drive people away from the Internet. * Regulations around access: If the government blocks internet access, it is difficult for people to remain online. Similarly, governments could block some websites from time to time, which may make it difficult for people to access critical information. India ranks 61.5 on the Mobile Connectivity Index, indicating that information is widely available and that the infrastructure for accessing the Internet has significantly improved. Mobile video and gaming are also on the rise due to rising connectivity in the country. We had 467 million YouTube users, while Facebook had 315.6 million in 2023. The average time spent online stands at six hours 23 minutes, while time spent using the Internet on mobile phones is three hours 55 minutes. While
26.7% use mobile for accessing banking services, 32.8% use mobile payment
gateways such as UPI, PayTM, etc. Youth use the Internet to watch videos, connect with peers, gain news and information, and study. India is expected to have 900 million mobile internet users by 2025. Activity 1 List the app you use most frequently and state what you use it for.

Mobile And Society Check Your Progress: 1
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Which country has the most significant number of internet users?

2. What is the Mobile Connectivity Index?

3. What factors affect internet penetration?

2.3 WHAT DOES ACCESS MEAN AND WHY IT
IS IMPORTANT
Access means the ability of the individual to connect to the Internet using their mobile device. Access is crucial for several reasons:
1. The mobile phone enables many services. It is easy to access health-
related content and use it for educational purposes, banks, etc.
2. The main use of mobiles is to facilitate connectivity among people.
Depending on the network and device type, connecting with friends and family is possible over video and voice. This allows citizens to work remotely, stay abreast of developments, and access courses online.
3. Laptops and computers are costly. A basic laptop costs around Rs 10,000,
while a basic internet-enabled Android phone starts as low as Rs 3000. This allows a large section of the population to access the Internet. These people can get a vast amount of information as India has one of the lowest rates for data access in the world at Rs 7.5/GB. This is much cheaper than the United States, which costs up to $8 (Rs 668/GB).
4. In many places, access to the Internet is restricted for certain sections
of the population due to traditional norms. For example, women are not allowed to access services because it may mean they have to travel far from home to access them if the mobile network is better. Mobile Internet allows this section to access the Internet from their homes, making information available to all.

5. Pandemics such as COVID-19 have taught us that whenever movement is Mobile Nations:
restricted, it becomes easy for us to remain connected when we use mobile Access and Reach Internet. Children could access online classes, health services could be made available online via telemedicine, and information about vaccination was made available through the COWIN app. Other than these, access to mobile Internet is important for administrative and logistical purposes. In India, access to daily wages is often tied to the authentication of the Unique Identification Number you have registered using your mobile phone. This Aadhar number is your social identity for all matters related to citizenship and governance. You need to quote the Aadhar number to avail yourself of daily wages, direct benefit schemes, and health schemes offered by the government.
2.4 ADVANTAGES OF HIGH MOBILE
PENETRATION
It has several advantages:
1. We have a large user base in India that still needs to be connected to the
Internet. When everyone can come online, we will have over 600 million people who need to come online to avail themselves of the above benefits. It is estimated that a 10% increase in mobile penetration can increase Total Factor Productivity in the long run by 4.2 percentage points.
2. Businesses can benefit from enhanced connectivity by delivering products
and services to those unconnected by retail outlets. This will help 'off- grid' communities to receive a wide variety of products. Imagine a supermarket shelf with several options for shampoos instead of whatever your neighbourhood shop sells. It empowers the consumer to have more choices and the ability to decide based on cost and preference instead of relying on local shopkeepers to make these choices on their behalf.
3. Mobile Internet also promotes inclusivity by allowing customers to place
orders with local businesses through WhatsApp. Mobile-based payments enable people to purchase groceries, transfer money and buy medicines, eliminating the need to carry cash. It allows persons with disabilities to use voice-based tools and other accessibility options to communicate with the outside world and get groceries delivered to their doorstep without stepping out of their homes.
4. Using mobile phones has enhanced the digital and technological capabilities
of users. However, low levels of digital literacy also make us vulnerable to cyber-attacks and scams. This is a hindrance to greater adoption of mobile phones. Mobile banking, while generally safe and convenient, does come with certain risks. We have seen in the previous unit that open or public WiFi spots can be a source of danger while using mobiles. We should avoid using such open spots when accessing banking or confidential websites on our phones. Clicking unauthorised links can lead to ransomware being planted on your device. Fake apps or phishing apps (apps that look like they are from your bank but are from fake actors and mean to steal your data) are also a real threat online. The 29

Mobile And Society most significant danger is losing your mobile device. Since your device carries confidential information, losing it can create many problems. It is advisable to use a remote locking feature to delete and lock your data remotely to keep us safe. Another way to keep oneself safe is to regularly update the apps and software on the phone and install anti-virus software. In the previous unit, we learned that we should not download suspicious apps, share our online banking passwords or confidential information with anyone over the phone, or click any link received over SMS or WhatsApp, as these could lead to scams. Other benefits of mobile services in India In India, mobile devices play a crucial role in Aadhaar authentication. As per the new Telecommunication Bill of 2023 provisions, biometric authentication will become mandatory to purchase SIM cards. This is supposed to strike down fraudulent activities and enhance security. However, there have been some concerns around data protection and surveillance due to the widespread use of Aadhar and mobile-based authentication. If we lose our credit card, we can block it and get a new one issues. However, if we lose our biometric data due to a data breach, anyone accessing it could misuse it. They could use our data to plant evidence, such as fingerprints. Since we cannot access the biometric data we create, it is impossible to know if such a record has been replaced with inauthentic or fraudulent data. For example, a daily wager may have his fingerprint data replaced with that of his supervisor, who can now claim his wages as he has access to them due to the biometric fraud. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1. What do you mean by access? Why is it important?

2. What are the advantages of high mobile penetration?

2.5 ADVANTAGES OF BEING 'MOBILE FIRST'
Globally, the mobile and telecom industry is poised for growth on the back of the 5G network. As we have studied previously, 5G can enable many mobile phone services, leading to efficiency and enhancements in our lives. Of these, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the most important. AI can help in the following 30 ways:

* AI uses our phone settings and search history to analyse the information we Mobile Nations: type and predict our search. It also offers predictive text suggestions that Access and Reach save us time and effort. For example, AI auto completes the text when we type 'good' on our phone by suggesting that we follow it up with 'morning' or 'evening', depending on the time of day. * In the previous unit, we learned about Generative AI and its uses. The new content we can create with this feature has many applications in every field. Mobile devices can be used in telemedicine in several ways: * Patients in far-flung areas can use mobile devices to consult with doctors in real time. Imagine you are camping out in a forest with your friends, and one of them is suddenly injured. You can quickly check possible options for first aid using the mobile phone and even consult a doctor in another part of the world for quick relief. You can send pictures or videos of the injury, and the doctor or health care practitioner could also provide video/ image guides on handling the injury over the mobile phone. * Telemedicine apps allow doctors to monitor patients remotely. Data such as oxygen and blood pressure levels are collected through apps and relayed to medical professionals, who can make decisions based on this information. It is even possible to perform surgeries using robotic instruments remotely. * The medical apps can help you keep track of diagnostic schedules, appointments and prescriptions. * Online consultations with specialists are beneficial for women who are sometimes unable to access doctors because of their inability to travel to far-off locations and cultural hindrances in seeking treatment for intimate illnesses. Telemedicine is also useful in supporting long-term care for patients who are bedridden due to illness or injury. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit
1) What are the advantages of being mobile first?

2) How can mobiles be used for telemedicine?

2.6 CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS
Even with all the significant advancements in satellite connectivity, remote areas need more infrastructure, such as mobile towers, to connect and fully leverage mobile connectivity's benefits. Remote and rural regions often need more robust mobile network infrastructure. The costs of spectrum and installing and managing mobile networks can be prohibitive. For telecom operators to continue offering their services, the average revenue per user may need to be higher. Confusion around policies and environmental considerations can affect telecom companies' operational challenges. There are areas of overlapping connectivity, whereas some areas have coverage gaps, meaning they do not receive mobile signals from any provider. It is challenging to encourage the adoption of mobile phones among people who have yet to be introduced to them. It translates into additional costs, and the benefits do not seem exciting enough for them to use the device. Many people also believe that radiation from cell phones can cause fertility issues and health problems, leading to non-adoption. Lack of awareness about the benefits of mobile Internet and digital literacy hinders adoption. Mobile operators, government and mobile device manufacturers need to work together to develop a strategy that fosters last-mile connectivity and allows consumers a wide range of technological options. More awareness of the benefits of mobile connectivity is required. The users must also be made digitally literate to handle the deluge of messages they are exposed to once they come online. Robust mechanisms are needed to protect people and redress their grievances when they face scams and other mobile-based crimes. Better advocacy is required around data protection and surveillance fears. Transparency in data practices is needed at every step. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of the unit.
1. What are the challenges that hinder the adoption of mobile connectivity?

2. What are the solutions that can enhance the adoption of mobile connectivity?

Mobile Nations:
2.7 FUTURE POSSIBILITIES
Access and Reach
As of present data, there is hope that the adoption of mobile phones with the Internet will continue to grow. Coverage and usage gaps are expected to narrow. The digital economy is expected to drive the real economy. However, fake videos, images, and texts often found on social media are a cause of concern. These messages can lead to violence. Digital and media literacy that helps individuals tap into the information universe is paramount. The widespread availability of 5G will enable a new era in the Internet's story. The world of the Internet of Things (IoT), which will allow you to connect your phone to your microwave and cook a meal from thousands of miles away, is a reality waiting for us to unravel.
2.8 LET US SUM UP
Mobile connectivity has become an important part of our lives. They are everywhere. Their portability and ability to perform a range of things, from calculations to clicking pictures to accessing social media, have made them highly relevant to today's connected world. Smartphones have enabled people to work seamlessly regardless of their location. The online services enabled by the mobile device allow users to connect effortlessly. They can also use AR, VR and AI simulations to communicate their ideas better with friends and colleagues. You are familiar with the food delivery apps that help you order your favourite food. Similarly, there are apps for anything you want to do on the Internet. You can access world cinema, documentaries and even news from other parts of the world. Gaming is a big source of entertainment for youth. However, there is also a darker side to the web. There can be numerous scams, cybercrimes and difficulties you may face online. It is very important to be aware of these and take preventive steps such as using secure passwords, not clicking on random links and never downloading apps from unauthorised app stores. Another interesting use of mobile phones is accessing news and information. This has enabled citizen reporters and witnesses to live-stream or record instances of abuse or major developments as they unfold. In many cases, their narratives differ greatly from those of mainstream media. This helps people seek accountability and enhance transparency in governance. The mobile phone also allows us to send and receive information immediately. In conclusion, mobile connectivity has transformed how we live, work, and interact with the world. It has opened new opportunities for communication, information access, and digital services and will continue to play a crucial role in shaping our future.
2.9 KEYWORDS
* Coverage Gap: Those who live in an area not covered by a mobile broadband network.

Mobile And Society * Usage gap: Those who live within the footprint of a mobile broadband network but do not use mobile internet services. * Internet of Things (IoT): The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to a network of physical devices, vehicles, appliances, and other physical objects embedded with sensors, software, and network connectivity, allowing them to collect and share data. IoT devices--also known as "smart objects"--can range from simple "smart home" devices like smart thermostats to wearables like smartwatches and RFID-enabled clothing to complex industrial machinery and transportation systems. Technologists even envision "smart cities" predicated on IoT technologies. * Telemedicine is a term that covers the use of technology to deliver clinical care at a distance. It ensures that a person receives healthcare when needed, especially for those with limited access to care. (Telemedicine: Definition, uses, benefits, and more (medicalnewstoday.com) * Generative AI: Generative artificial intelligence (AI) is a type of AI that generates images, text, videos, and other media in response to inputted prompts. * Total factor productivity: It measures productive efficiency by measuring how much output can be produced from certain inputs.
2.10 FURTHER READINGS
1. Coursera. (n.d.). What Is Generative AI? Definition, Applications, and
Impact. Retrieved from https://www.coursera.org/articles/what-is- generative-ai
2. Exploding Topics. (n.d.). Mobile Internet Traffic. Retrieved from https://
explodingtopics.com/blog/mobile-internet-traffic
3. Firstpost. (n.d.). India has the third cheapest mobile data in the world:
People in US pay 33x more than Indians. Retrieved from https://www. firstpost.com/world/india-has-the-third-cheapest-mobile-data-in-the- world-people-is-us-pay-33x-more-than-indians-12614602.html
4. GSMA. (2023). The-State-of-Mobile-Internet-Connectivity-
Report-2023 [PDF]. Retrieved from https://www.gsma.com/r/wp- content/uploads/2023/10/The-State-of-Mobile-Internet-Connectivity- Report-2023.pdf
5. GSMA. (2023). 2023 - GSMA Mobile Connectivity Index. Retrieved
from https://www.mobileconnectivityindex.com/index.html
6. The Economic Times. (n.d.). India internet users: India to have 900
million active internet users by 2025, says report. Retrieved from https:// www.indiatimes.com/
7. Visual Capitalist. (n.d.). What Does 1GB of Mobile Data Cost in Every
Country? Retrieved from https://www.visualcapitalist.com/cost-of- 34 mobile-data-worldwide/

2.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. China has the most significant number of internet users, with over 1 billion
internet users as of recent estimates.
2. The Mobile Connectivity Index is a tool developed by GSMA to measure
the performance of countries in enabling mobile internet connectivity. It considers four key enablers: infrastructure, affordability, consumer readiness, and content and services.
3. Factors affecting internet penetration include infrastructure availability,
affordability of services and devices, digital literacy, government policies and regulations, socio-economic factors, and cultural attitudes towards technology. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Access refers to the ability to obtain or make use of something, in this context,
it often pertains to the availability and utilization of digital technologies and the internet. Access is important because it allows individuals to participate fully in the digital world, benefiting from information, communication, services, and opportunities for education, employment, and civic engagement. Ensuring broad and equitable access helps bridge digital divides, promotes social inclusion, and fosters economic growth and innovation.
2. High mobile penetration offers numerous advantages, significantly
enhancing connectivity by ensuring widespread communication capabilities, enabling people to stay connected with family, friends, and colleagues. This connectivity facilitates economic opportunities, allowing individuals to engage in economic activities such as mobile banking, e-commerce, and remote work, which in turn contribute to economic growth. Additionally, high mobile penetration provides easy access to a wealth of information and services, including educational resources, health information, and government services. This accessibility promotes social inclusion by bridging social gaps and providing marginalized communities with vital digital services and information. Moreover, the prevalence of mobile technology spurs innovation and the development of new technologies and applications, driving technological advancement and improving overall quality of life. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Adopting a mobile-first approach offers several significant advantages.
Firstly, it ensures wider reach and accessibility, as it allows content and services to be readily available to a larger audience, particularly in regions where mobile devices are the primary means of internet access. This approach also prioritizes an improved user experience by designing for smaller screens first, which results in a more intuitive and seamless interaction for users, thereby enhancing engagement. Moreover, mobile- 35

first designs typically lead to enhanced performance, as websites and applications optimized for mobile devices tend to load faster and function more efficiently, accommodating the limitations of lower bandwidth and processing power commonly associated with mobile usage.
2. Mobile devices have revolutionized the field of telemedicine by enabling
remote consultations, where patients can use video calls and chat features to consult with healthcare professionals from the comfort of their homes. This capability is particularly beneficial for individuals in remote or underserved areas who might otherwise have limited access to medical services. Additionally, mobile health applications and connected devices facilitate continuous health monitoring by tracking and transmitting vital health data, such as heart rate, glucose levels, and physical activity, directly to healthcare providers. This continuous monitoring allows for timely medical interventions and better management of chronic conditions. Furthermore, mobile apps provide patients with easy access to their medical records, educational resources, and reminders for medications and appointments, thus improving patient engagement, adherence to treatment plans, and overall health outcomes. Check Your Progress: 4
1. One of the primary challenges hindering the adoption of mobile connectivity
is economic barriers. The high costs associated with mobile devices and data plans can be prohibitive for low-income populations, making it difficult for them to access and maintain mobile connectivity. Additionally, infrastructure limitations pose a significant obstacle. In many rural and remote areas, inadequate telecommunications infrastructure leads to poor network coverage and unreliable service, which discourages the use of mobile technology. Furthermore, a lack of digital literacy also impedes the adoption of mobile connectivity. Many individuals lack the necessary digital skills and awareness to effectively use mobile technology, thereby reducing their ability to benefit from its advantages.
2. To enhance the adoption of mobile connectivity, several solutions can be
implemented. Subsidies and affordable pricing are crucial in making mobile devices and data plans more accessible to low-income users. By reducing the financial burden, more people can afford to adopt and maintain mobile connectivity. Additionally, investing in the expansion and improvement of telecommunications infrastructure, particularly in underserved areas, is essential. Enhanced network coverage and reliable service will encourage greater use of mobile technology. Finally, digital literacy programs play a vital role in empowering individuals. Providing education and training to improve digital skills and awareness enables more people to utilize mobile technology effectively and participate fully in the digital economy.

UNIT 3 MOBILE AND NEWS MEDIA
Structure
3.0 Introduction
3.1 Learning Outcomes
3.2 Mobile Media
3.2.1 Characteristics of Mobile Media
3.2.2 Types of Mobile Media
3.2.3 Uses of Mobile Media
3.3 Mobile Media Production
3.3.1 Mobile News Gathering and Storytelling
3.3.2 Mobile News Editing and Distribution
3.3.3 Utilising Mobile Devices for Multimedia Storytelling
3.3.4 Ethical Consideration of Mobile Journalism
3.4 Future of Mobile News Media
3.4.1 Emerging Trends in Mobile News Media
3.4.2 The Impact of Mobile News Media on Society
3.5 Limitations and Concerns
3.6 Let Us Sum UP
3.7 Keywords
3.8 Further Readings
3.9 Check your Progress: Possible Answers
3.0 INTRODUCTION
The relationship between mobile and news media in India is incredibly strong. Smartphones are the dominant device for accessing news, which has changed how information is received and consumed. Today, 72% of Indians access news through smartphones, compared to just 35% on computers. This makes India a "mobile-first" market in terms of news consumption. News aggregators and apps like Google News, Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint are highly popular for their convenience and curated content. A 2022 report from the Pew Research Center's Project for Excellence in Journalism and the Economist Group, "The Future of Mobile News," suggests that as many as 43% say the news they get on their tablets adds to their overall news consumption. And almost a third, 31%, said they get news from news sources on their tablet. This mobile-first approach has increased news consumption overall, making news more accessible and immediate. Scannable news formats like short

Mobile And Society articles, videos, and infographics have become popular, catering to shorter attention spans. Greater emphasis on local and regional news reflects the ease of access to geographically specific information.
3.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Gain an in-depth understanding of the mobile-first news media landscape
in India;
* Analyse the impact of mobile technology on news consumption patterns and preferences; * Develop effective communication skills to engage with news content on mobile platforms; * We are developing critical thinking skills to differentiate between credible news sources and misinformation; and * Utilise mobile technology to share news and information responsibly.
3.2 MOBILE MEDIA
Mobile media refers to the production of different media content for smartphones and its consumption on smartphones and tablets. Media content can be divided into different types:
1. News and Information: Mobile media has become the primary way
of consuming news and informative content. In a Reuter Institute of Communication report, 72% of Indians consumed news and information through their smartphones, whereas only 35% of users consumed content on computers and laptops. This shift has led to changes in how content is produced and consumed. The following are the key trends in mobile media content: i. Short content: Recent trends suggest that people are more interested in consuming short content. Therefore, content producers focus on producing short articles, videos, and infographics. The popularity of YouTube shorts and Facebook reels strongly supports this trend. ii. Personalised Content: When we consume content on smartphones, we generally do it through news apps. These apps provide us with content and collect our watch history, search history, and interests. Based on this history, news producers create an algorithm to provide us with personalised content. iii. Live Streaming: As news content is consumed on smartphones, news organisations also include new ways to give users a better experience. To provide breaking news, producers need not wait for visuals and images. Instead, they go for live streaming on their platform. Now, users can experience real-time feeds through live streaming. iv. Local News: This is another area where mobile media is concentrated. One of the important elements that defines news is proximity. People 38 want to know about events and incidents that are taking place nearby.

With mobile becoming one of the prominent tools for consuming Mobile and News Media news, content creators are creating apps focusing on local news only. Today, many apps provide content about a particular city or town. v. Fact-Checking: This is one of the growing areas of news production. Mobile has filled the gap between news producers and consumers. Consumers also produce content through pictures, write-ups, and videos. Many platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, depend significantly on user-generated content. But when everybody is a content creator, there is always a problem of fake content circulated among users. To know whether the provided content is fake or authentic now, news organisations are creating platforms providing fact-checking.
2. Entertainment: Mobile media and entertainment have become deeply
intertwined daily. With the ubiquitous presence of smartphones and tablets, we can access many entertainment options at our fingertips. India boasts a vibrant and growing entertainment industry and mobile media is crucial in distributing and consuming entertainment news. 72% of Indians consume entertainment news through smartphones, highlighting the dominance of mobile media. News aggregators like Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint are extremely popular, offering curated content and short formats. Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter are major entertainment news sources, with dedicated accounts and trending hashtags. Local and regional news apps cater to India's diverse linguistic and cultural landscape. Popular entertainment content on mobile i. Celebrity gossip and Bollywood news are major draws, with dedicated channels, websites, and apps focusing on stars and their activities. ii. Movie reviews, trailers, and release updates are widely available, driving movie-going habits. iii. Music streaming platforms like Spotify and Gaana integrate news and interviews with music streaming, creating a comprehensive entertainment experience. iv. Short-form video platforms like TikTok and Instagram Reels offer bite-sized entertainment news and trends. The convergence of entertainment news and mobile media in India presents a dynamic and evolving landscape. By understanding the trends and challenges, news organisations and content creators can engage with the audience effectively and contribute to a thriving entertainment ecosystem.
3. Educational Content: Mobile media has transformed the field of education.
Educational content delivered through mobile devices is now a powerful tool for teaching and learning, offering numerous benefits for educators and students. i. Increased Accessibility: Mobile devices provide access to educational resources anytime and anywhere. It has broken the barriers of time and distance. Students can learn at their own pace and convenience.

Mobile And Society Offline access to content helps the learner to access the content without internet connectivity. ii. Enhanced Engagement: Mobile-friendly content formats like interactive videos, quizzes, and games make learning more engaging and enjoyable. AR (Augmented Reality)and VR (Virtual Reality) technology can create immersive learning experiences that bring abstract concepts to life. Social learning platforms facilitate collaboration and interaction among students and teachers. iii. Personalised Learning: Mobile apps and platforms can adapt to students' needs and learning styles. Adaptive learning algorithms provide customised recommendations and learning pathways. Students can track their progress and receive immediate feedback, allowing for self-reflection and improvement. iv. Accessibility for Diverse Learners: Mobile technology can provide educational resources for students with disabilities, such as text-to- speech tools and audiobooks. Content can be translated into different languages, making education accessible to a broader audience.
4. Creativity and Expression: Mobile media has become an important tool
for creative expression, empowering individuals to share their creative ideas. Smartphones and tablets offer a powerful platform for this purpose by providing access to creative tools. Mobile media empowers anyone to become a creator, regardless of background or resources. Barriers to entry are lowered, allowing diverse voices and perspectives to be heard and celebrated. i. Ease of accessing tools: Mobile devices offer instant access to creative tools, allowing individuals to capture their creative ideas anytime and anywhere instantly. Portability will enable users to create content anywhere. There is no requirement for traditional studios and workstations. All tools for creative production are available on mobile devices. There are several apps and software available to do a variety of creative work, which include:
- Photo and video editing: Adobe Photoshop Mobile, KineMaster
- Music creation and production: GarageBand, FL Studio Mobile
- Drawing and painting: Procreate, Adobe Illustrator Draw
- Writing and storytelling: Ulysses, Wattpad
- Coding and programming: Mimo, SoloLearn
ii. Social media as creative tools: Social media platforms allow for immediate sharing of creative work with a global audience, facilitating feedback, collaboration, and community building. Take the example of platform X (formerly Twitter), where you have to write your ideas crisply, as there is a word limit in putting forward your thoughts. By using your creativity, you can produce good content. Live streaming platforms offer real-time interaction and engagement with an audience, fostering new forms of creative performance and expression.

iii. AR (Augmented Reality) and VR (Virtual Reality): These Mobile and News Media technologies offer immersive experiences that can be used to create interactive storytelling, visualisations, and virtual worlds. iv. Creativity and expression: Capturing photos and videos, editing content, and sharing creative work through social media platforms.
3.2.1 Characteristics of Mobile Media
The evolution of mobile media can be traced back to the early 2000s when media companies generally converged around using SMS texting and MMS multimedia to communicate and push news updates. In 2007, with the advent of the iPhone, the focus began changing to building native mobile apps for various types of phones and their operating systems. Mobile media has several characteristics that distinguish it from other forms of media. According to a 2019 paper titled "Mobile Media and Communication: A Review and Research Agenda," published in the journal Mobile Media & Communication, mobile media is characterised by the following features:
1. Ubiquity: Mobile media is always a click away. We always keep our
mobile phones with us, so this form of media has a ubiquitous presence. It enables us to access information, entertainment, and communication channels.
2. Personalisation: This is also a key characteristic of mobile media. As
we know, all the apps and websites we access record our watch history and searches. Based on that, they deliver personalised content to the users.
3. Interactivity: Mobile devices facilitate two-way communication and
engagement, allowing users to comment, share, and actively participate in content creation.
4. Real-time: Mobile media provides access to updates and information
as they happen, fostering a sense of immediacy and connection.
5. Short content: Attention spans tend to be shorter on mobile devices,
driving the creation and consumption of short-form content like videos, infographics, and bite-sized articles.
6. Location-based services: Mobile devices can utilise GPS and other
location-based technologies to offer relevant services and information based on the user's location.
7. Social integration: Mobile platforms enable seamless integration
with social media networks, facilitating sharing, discussion, and community building around content.
8. Multimodality: Mobile media incorporates text, images, audio, and
video, creating a more immersive and engaging experience. Overall, these characteristics shape the unique landscape of mobile media and its impact on our lives. Understanding these characteristics is crucial for navigating this complex environment and maximising its communication, creativity, and learning potential. 41

Mobile And Society 3.2.2 Types of Mobile Media
Mobile news can be presented in several formats, each with advantages and disadvantages. Here are some of the most common formats:
1. Text Articles: This is the most used news format for mobile. It should be
simple and easy to read. Mobile text articles provide a concise overview of the news story. Mobile platforms should be created in a manner suitable for quick updates. Mobile users want to get updated and breaking news instantly. One of the disadvantages of this format is that text-based articles are limited in conveying complex information and need more visual appeal than other formats.
2. Image-Based News: Image-based news can be a series of images or a single
image with important information. This kind of content is eye-catching and engaging. It conveys information quickly and efficiently. However, it might need more depth and details to suit all news stories. This kind of content is usually light and gives general details of an event.
3. Video News: Video news is a multimedia presentation of news that
involves presenting news through video footage, audio, and written content in one package. This kind of content is highly engaging and informative. A resourceful source can produce it, and news organisations with all the resources can generate this kind of content. Consumption of this kind of content requires high-speed internet, which is one of the limitations of this type of content.
4. Audio News/Podcasting: This is one of the fastest-growing mobile news
types. People can listen to podcasts while doing other work, like driving or doing other work. This type of news is convenient for people interested in quality and in-depth analytical news. Podcasting requires focused users, who have to focus intently to understand properly. This type of content is not suitable for all environments.
5. Live Streaming: Live streaming provides real-time updates. It is done by
live streaming an event with live commentary. It allows users to witness events as they unfold. Live streaming has brought mobile media ahead of TV news because now mobile media can also provide breaking news like TV through live streaming with the added feature of interactive news format, where comments and inputs can be added by users themselves.
6. Social Media Content: There are many social media platforms, and all the
platforms have different formats for content sharing. For example, if you are sharing content on Facebook, then you have no word limit, whereas if you want to share something on X (formerly Twitter), you have to share it crisply, as there is a word limit of 240 characters. Similarly, if you share video content on Facebook, it has to be in landscape mode, whereas if you share content on Instagram, you have to shoot it in portrait mode. You should also have a portrait-mode video for Facebook reels and YouTube shorts. Facebook reels and YouTube shorts also require different kinds of content generation skills, where you have to be very concise and crisp and able to share the central idea of the content in a short video of 1 minute or less than 1 minute. Social media content fosters discussion and engagement,

but at the same time, this medium is prone to misinformation and biased Mobile and News Media content. It would help to be very careful about the news source.
3.2.3 Uses of Mobile Media
Mobile media has become an essential part of our lives, transforming how we consume information, stay connected, and entertain ourselves. Its uses are vast and ever-evolving, but here are some of the most prominent uses of mobile media, especially for communication and information purposes:
1. Communication: The first important use of mobile media is
communication. Mobile media has made communication easy and instant. Before the advent of Web 2.0, users used to send messages through mobile messaging features. Still, after Web 2.0 emerged, various mobile apps like WhatsApp, Messenger, and Telegram were used to send and receive messages and multimedia content. These apps have enabled people to use instant messaging, voice calls, and video conferencing on the go.
2. Social Interaction: One of the important roles of media is to provide a
space where people may discuss their issues and, through discussions, find their answers. This kind of space is popularly called the "Public Sphere", the idea that Jurgen Habermas gave. In this way, social media has provided an "online public sphere" to the people. Platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter allow us to share updates, connect with communities, and stay informed about current events, fostering a sense of belonging and social interaction.
3. Information and News: Mobile media has made producing and consuming
information and news very easy. Now, you can have various information per your choice a click away. Several apps from news organisations and aggregators provide instant access to breaking news, articles, and multimedia content, keeping us informed about local and global events. There are also various apps to support content creation and production.
4. Podcasts: Podcasts or audio content are provided to listeners interested
in analytical and in-depth information on an issue. Podcasts are made on various topics, from news and current affairs to personal development and entertainment.
5. Educational content: Mobile media has made learning convenient.
Through mobile media, students can access millions of online lectures and tutorials on various subjects. Various educational institutions have also developed apps to provide content through mobile media. It has made knowledge accessible anytime, anywhere. Mobile reading apps like Kindle and Audible offer access to millions of e-books and audiobooks, providing convenient and portable ways to enjoy literature and storytelling.
6. Entertainment: The Media's role is to entertain. Mobile media has not
only made it accessible easily but also provided new experiences to users. Various streaming services like Netflix, Disney+, and YouTube offer vast libraries of movies, TV shows, music, and other video content, providing endless entertainment options for all ages.

Mobile And Society 7. Work and Time Management: Mobile media has provided various tools to help us manage our work and time. Calendar apps help us manage appointments, deadlines, and tasks, keeping our schedules on track. Apps like Google Meet, Zoom, Microsoft Teams, etc., allow you to conduct online meetings. These apps have helped us manage work and time efficiently. Various financial management tools help us track our spending, manage finances, and make informed financial decisions.
8. Health and Wellness: Mobile media has also provided several apps to
manage our health. Some apps track our steps, workouts, and sleep patterns, motivating us to stay active and healthy. Meditation apps offer guided meditations, breathing exercises, and mindfulness techniques to reduce stress and promote psychological well-being. There are healthcare apps that provide convenient access to medical advice and consultations, improving healthcare accessibility and convenience. These are just a few examples of how mobile media has integrated various aspects of our lives. As technology continues to evolve, the possibilities for mobile media are endless, constantly shaping how we communicate, learn, play, and experience the world around us. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss some key trends in mobile media content.

2. Explain how mobile media has transformed the field of education.

3.3 MOBILE MEDIA PRODUCTION
Mobile Media Production is an exciting field that surrounds the world. It includes various forms of media creation and production. It involves the development, planning and execution of visual and audio content for different platforms. These platforms include film, television, YouTube, and other digital media. Creative media production offers many opportunities for those passionate about the media industry, whether producing a film, creating graphic designs or composing engaging audio content. Mobile is the most accessible device for storytelling. Therefore, mobile production is diverse. The most fascinating part of mobile production is that anybody can create it. Scholars have identified three elements of mobile storytelling: * Compelling characters

* An Exciting and convincing story world Mobile and News Media * A strong storyline with clearly defined plot points These elements are important for mobile stories. These elements can be used to create emotion and engagement for creating mobile stories.
3.3.1 Mobile News Gathering and Storytelling
Mobile news gathering refers to using mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets to collect and report news stories. It allows journalists to be more flexible and responsive. Mobile devices are also more portable and easier to use than traditional news-gathering equipment, allowing journalists to capture footage and interviews in real-time. Journalists use several types of mobile news-gathering techniques to report news stories. Some of these techniques include:
1. Mobile Reporting: This is the most basic form of mobile news-gathering.
Reporters use their smartphones to capture video, audio, and photos of events. Journalists can use various tools to enhance the quality of production. For example, news-gathering apps like FiLMiC Pro, LumaFusion, and Mavis3 provide advanced features such as manual focus, exposure control, and audio monitoring, allowing journalists to capture high-quality footage and audio using their mobile devices. Now, journalists are also using their mobile phones for live reporting. Several times, they have given Piece to Camera using their smartphones.
2. Live Streaming: Journalists use this feature to broadcast events in real-time.
By using this feature, journalists provide immediate content, and it also enhances audience interaction. Platforms like Facebook Live, Instagram Live, and YouTube Live enable journalists to broadcast events in real time. This feature is useful for journalists covering protests, press conferences or live events, where quick updates are vital. A strong internet connection is required to use this feature effectively; otherwise, live streaming will not be smooth, negatively affecting audience engagement. Journalists must take care of this technical requirement.
3. Social Media Reporting: Social media reporting involves using social
media platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram to report news stories. This technique uses social media to share news updates, photos, and videos of news events. Journalists can also use vast amounts of user-generated content on social media platforms to gather information. However, journalists must be cautious when using user-generated content because several manipulated and morphed user-generated content is available on social media. Before using that content, journalists must verify the content from various sources. It requires critical thinking and fact-checking to ensure accuracy and avoid misinformation. Social media reporting is beneficial in providing diverse voices on an issue.
4. Drone Journalism: Drone journalism means using mobile app-guided
drones for news-gathering purposes. Drone photos and videos provide a unique aerial perspective to news coverage. Using drones allows

Mobile And Society journalists to be more innovative and insightful in their reports. The use of aerial videography is not new in journalism. In 1958, KTLA, a US- based news channel, modified a single-engine helicopter to get aerial views for news coverage. Soon, other media houses followed. However, there were some limitations to using helicopters for news gathering. First, only big media houses could afford it; second, it was not appropriate to cover disasters as it would be risky for the news person to shoot from a helicopter. Technological advancement brought drones, which are affordable to anybody. So many freelancers and individuals give different perspectives to a news item, which news organisations can efficiently use through social media aggregation. Before using the drone, one has to get proper training. They must understand safety protocols and adhere to the local regulations. Drone reporting is ideal for covering environmental issues and disasters and showcasing large-scale events.
5. Citizen Journalism: In the era of new media technologies, it is popularly
said that "Every citizen is a journalist". Ordinary citizens equipped with smartphones can become valuable sources of information, capturing events in their communities and bringing them to the attention of news organisations. There are instances where citizen journalists acted as valuable sources of crucial information, which turned into breaking news for mainstream media. For example, the raid on Osama Bin Laden was first reported by a Twitter user; later on, it became sensational news all over the world. Information shared by common citizens can offer valuable insights and perspectives that traditional media overlooks. However, verifying and vetting citizen-generated content is crucial to maintaining journalistic integrity by using information shared by common citizens.
3.3.2 Mobile News Editing and Distribution
Mobile news editing and distribution require a delicate balance between speed, accuracy, and engagement. By adopting these strategies and staying informed about the evolving landscape of mobile news platforms and audience preferences, journalists can effectively transform their reporting into impactful stories that reach the right people at the right time, right on their mobile devices.
1. Speed: One of the key features of mobile media is immediacy. Mobile
users seek information as early as possible. If you miss that, you will lose your users. This means that when you get raw material distributed among users, you have to edit quickly to deliver content as soon as possible.
2. Accuracy: You not only have to maintain speed, but at the same time, you
have to be very accurate. Because under the pressure of providing content as soon as possible, there is always a chance of misinformation or fake information. Traditional media has reporters; therefore, they can recheck the information from their sources before publishing or broadcasting. Mobile media hugely depends on the feed users provide, so the accuracy issue becomes very important. For accuracy, new media content producers should always try to get at least one authentic source, whether individual or traditional.
3. Engagement: One of the key features of new media is interactivity. Content
46 should be engaging and interactive. It should motivate users to comment

and share it further. If your content is not engaging, it will become stale Mobile and News Media very early. Online content creators should always look for ways to make the content more engaging by adding various features and facilities.
3.3.2.1. Mobile Editing Strategies
The final stages of mobile news creation, editing, and distribution are as crucial as news gathering. As we know, mobile users want instant information. Hence, journalists must quickly transform the raw material into engaging stories and deliver them to the right audience through the most effective channels. The key aspects of mobile editing are the following:
1. Conciseness: Mobile users want short content they can consume in micro
time while waiting for the metro or bus. This is why social media platforms like Facebook and YouTube have created reels and shorts, respectively. Therefore, while editing, the focus should be on delivering the core message within seconds. Mobile media editors should aim for brevity and clarity.
2. Visual Storytelling: Mobile editors should always provide a visual story.
This means prioritising visuals like short clips, powerful images, and infographics while editing. Visuals should be arranged to tell the whole story by themselves. Don't hesitate to use visual enhancement tools and apps to improve visual impact.
3. Clear voice-over: In mobile media, impactful audio matters. Always try
to get voice-over artists with clear and impactful voices. Use a voice-over to narrate the contextual thing; subtitles can do what is needed for footage. Don't overwhelm the story with voice-over.
4. Elements of engagement: One important role of mobile media editors
is engaging content. Therefore, various platforms like polls, quizzes, discussion boards, and other interactive elements should be integrated into the story. Integration with all social media platforms is also important.
3.3.2.2. Distribution of Mobile Media
Mobile media can be distributed in several ways. You can have your platform or use various available platforms for news sharing. These are the following:
1. News Apps: You can use your news app to publish your stories. Otherwise,
you can partner with established news app platforms to reach a wider audience. Many mobile media creators have apps to popularise and monetise later if they get more users. In India, this trend is to create localised news apps, which are expanding faster. Media students may follow this trend and must try to establish such apps.
2. Social Media: Social Media is another destination for mobile content.
Many users are not professionals who want to run their apps. Many users are not regular content creators, but they create it occasionally when they find such an opportunity. These types of users use social media to share their content. They use the power of platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram to amplify the reach of their content and engage with the audience directly. Here, they can also earn money if their content becomes popular. But they have to share their earnings on social media platforms. Platforms grab a large share of earnings. 47

Mobile And Society 3. Push Notifications: This is another way to grab users' attention. Many media organisations and news apps utilise push notifications to alert followers about breaking news or highlight important updates from their stories. This is done to grab users' attention and engage them with the stories.
4. Live Streaming is also a very useful way to share content with users
immediately. It has enabled mobile media creators to share breaking news or real-time updates of an event. This feature of mobile media has challenged the monopoly of TV news channels over live footage of an event and increased audience participation.
5. Targeted Messaging is a way to deliver personalised content to users. It
involves collecting data on users' content consumption patterns and sharing relevant content with them, which is a kind of audience segmentation based on their consumption patterns.
6. Video Sharing Platforms: Many users create documentaries, docudramas,
or films for mobile users. These creators use video-sharing platforms like YouTube, Vimeo, PeerTube, etc. These platforms catalogue the content under various categories. YouTube has extensive cataloguing and over 2 billion users. These video-sharing platforms also share the earnings with the content creators. Content creators should also consider other factors when distributing content. First, optimise your content for efficient data consumption. This will make your content accessible to users with limited data plans. Second, fact-checking is also important. As mobile media creators heavily depend on the information users share, they must be very careful about whether shared facts are correct or manipulated. This will increase your authenticity and credibility as a content creator.
3.3.3 Utilising Mobile Devices for Multimedia Storytelling
For mobile media content creation, the mobile device is a tool that can do almost all the tasks. Mobile devices are equipped with many apps which can perform many things to create content. These compact powerhouses boast features and apps that can take your storytelling to new heights. You can utilise mobile devices to do the following things:
1. Picture and Audio/Video: You can use your mobile phone's camera to
capture photographs and record video. One of the advantages of this device is that it is handy, and you do not need to carry a heavy bag to do this task. Your mobile phones are equipped with a high-quality camera through which you can capture high-quality visuals. Try to explore various modes while taking pictures or shooting videos. Experiment with various light conditions and see which is best suited for the occasion. Try to use different angles to create a visual story. Apart from this, your mobile camera has various creative features; show your creativity using those features. Your mobile is also equipped with a microphone to record clear audio using your device. You can also add an external mic to your phone to take interviews, give voice-overs to the visual story, and record ambient sound. Consider binaural

mics for a 3D audio experience. While capturing pictures and videos, you can Mobile and News Media gather additional data using your mobile phone. You can add GPS location to the video or picture, enhancing your story's authenticity. You can also easily gather weather conditions of any place in the world from your mobile set. It is very helpful while doing environment journalism and sports journalism.
2. Mobile Editing: One of the most important elements of production is post-
production. Mobile makes post-production easy. Various powerful editing apps enable you to edit your footage very easily. Apps like KineMaster and iMovie let you seamlessly edit your footage. With these apps, you can add music and sound effects to your footage. You can also give voice-over on the app itself. You can add text and graphics to your footage. You need to train yourself before using all the apps' options. Once ready, you can produce content that is not less than desktop editing. Editing photographs is also very easy. All mobile phones have built-in cropping and collage functions. Apart from that, many photo editing apps may enhance the quality of photo editing. Microsoft provides a mobile version of Word, Excel, PowerPoint, etc., for editing text or other data. On your mobile phone, you can easily edit all the textual information. Try to use Word's audio typing feature; you can write a long write-up very quickly. Don't bother if some word is not written correctly; complete audio typing, and then you can edit the copy manually.
3. Value Addition: To enhance the experience of mobile content consumers,
you can add value to your existing story in various ways. One such thing is exploring augmented reality (AR) storytelling. AR apps like Layar or Blippar can add a virtual element to your physical environment, allowing users to interact with the content differently. Another value addition you can make is adding interactive elements to your existing story. Use apps like Poll Everywhere to integrate interactive elements like polls and quizzes to boost audience engagement.
4. Disseminating/Sharing: Mobile phones have all the social media apps. You
can share your finished work on any platform which suits you according to your content format and style. All these platforms also have different user bases. For example, Snapchat is used mostly by the younger generation, whereas users of all categories use Facebook. Likewise, Instagram is more popular among the younger generation. You can also choose these platforms based on your content format and style. For example, if you have created your work in portrait format, then Snapchat, Instagram, and Facebook reels are more suitable. You can use the Facebook wall feed if your content is in landscape mode. Some dedicated storytelling platforms, like Spryto or Krock, are designed for mobile storytelling. These platforms have several features, such as interactive elements, narratives of various types, and targeted distribution options. Live streaming through Facebook Live and YouTube lets you showcase real- time storytelling. This feature allows you to cover live events, conduct live interviews, and show behind-the-scenes glimpses to your audience to give them a sense of connectedness and immediacy. 49

Mobile And Society 3.3.4 Ethical Consideration of Mobile Journalism
Mobile journalism poses various ethical considerations for journalists. According to Stephen Chernow (2016), mobile journalism presents several ethical challenges, including the need for journalists to verify user-generated content, protect sources, and ensure that mobile journalism does not compromise the safety of journalists. Another study by Ahmed Deen & Po-Lin Pan (2022) suggests that using smartphones as journalistic tools raises several ethical concerns, including privacy, accuracy, and credibility. Let us discuss some key ethical considerations while doing mobile journalism:
1. Accuracy: In mobile journalism, accuracy is one of the ethical
considerations. As news gathering and dissemination is very easy from mobile, misinformation and unconfirmed reports have also been circulated on mobile platforms. Therefore, mobile journalists need to be very cautious while circulating the information. Verify the source of information and facts very rigorously. Always try to give your story a bigger context. It will help users get a greater picture, and it will lead to providing the right interpretation. Accuracy can be maintained by maintaining transparency. Be transparent about your source and potential limitations of your reporting.
2. Privacy: The right to privacy is a very important ethical consideration for
journalists. Mobile journalists tend to record everything during any crucial event without considering others' right to privacy. As journalists, we should always respect individuals' privacy. There is also a misconception that we need not get permission from the individuals we record publicly. Filming somebody in public places without obtaining consent is also a violation of the right to privacy. So, if you are filming somebody, always get permission before doing that. If you are covering sensitive issues, always blur the faces of individuals, particularly in sensitive situations. Avoid compromising anyone's safety or security. Journalists' safety is also important. Journalists should always assess potential risks before covering an issue. Journalists should respect local customs and traditions while covering a story in a different cultural setting. They should not try to misrepresent the facts without understanding their traditions.
3. Credibility: This comes with objectivity and following an unbiased
approach. To do this, journalists should bring wholeness to the story. This means giving space to all stakeholders. It would help if you did not cherry- pick the facts. Give importance to all sides of the story and present diverse perspectives. In doing so, avoid giving your personal opinions or biases. You might have your opinion, but this should not be reflected in your writing. If you make any assumptions, challenge those assumptions and be critical of your biases.
4. Social Responsibility: Journalism is all about empowering common citizens
and making powerful accountable. Act responsibly as a journalist. Always try to promote responsible discourse. Encourage positive and constructive discourse created around your stories. Journalists' responsibility does not

end simply by posting the story; they must act as moderators in online Mobile and News Media communities and actively address misinformation and hate speech. Mobile journalists should always try to give a voice to underrepresented communities. Traditional media has gatekeeping at several levels, and there is a lack of space and slots. However, for mobile journalists, this is not the case; they have ample space to advocate for positive change in society. By addressing these ethical considerations, mobile journalists can report responsibly, accurately, and sensitively. Remember, your stories have the potential to inform, educate, and even inspire positive change. Use your platform wisely and contribute to a more informed and ethical media landscape.
3.4 FUTURE OF MOBILE NEWS MEDIA
The field of Mobile media-based journalism is constantly expanding, and it is expected that it will continue to grow in the future. Mobile has been made to create content and share it with the users. It is also expected that constantly changing audience preferences and rapidly evolving new media technology have the potential to tap new audiences and provide a more immersive experience for readers and viewers.
3.4.1 Emerging Trends in Mobile News Media
Constantly changing mobile technologies and user preferences support new content types to give users new experiences. Let us discuss some emerging trends in mobile news media:
1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Virtual Reality (VR): AR and VR-based
stories promote immersive storytelling, allowing users to experience news events firsthand. AR and VR-based news could redefine news consumption and audience interactivity with the content. These kinds of content are particularly important for complex and remote stories for which real footage is unavailable. AI-powered news generation can also provide personalised news summaries or produce original news articles. While ethical concerns like accuracy and bias remain, they can give opportunities for the production of tailored content. AI-powered algorithms can also be used to personalise news feeds. Now, AI can tailor the content according to individuals' interests. However, this raises concerns about filter bubbles and echo chambers, but at the same time, it provides opportunities for promoting diversity of viewpoints.
2. Interactive and Participatory content: A new trend in mobile media
content is more user interactivity and participation in content generation. There has been a rise in interactivity-based content, where users contribute to content creation through polls, quizzes, and discussions. Content creators run quizzes and discussions on specific topics to increase interactivity. There are various app-based platforms which enable journalists to do this very conveniently. Based on the inputs received from users, content is created. These contents give a sense of community and allow diverse perspectives on an issue.

Mobile And Society 3. Targeting niche community: Mobile users are very interested in knowing about the incidents and events of their immediate surroundings. This user preference has added a new trend in content generation for mobile users. Now, hyper-local news platforms are on the rise. These platforms provide news and events in users' immediate surroundings. This new trend has strengthened the growing demand for localised content. This has also strengthened the community connections. It is also supported by the increasing popularity of niche social media communities based on specific news topics or interests. Local area-based social media communities are also on the rise. Content creators are also targeting these niche communities for content generation.
3.4.2 The Impact of Mobile News Media on Society
Any new technology impacts society. Mobile technology brings all kinds of information to individuals at a click away, enabling individuals to access all kinds of information. Mobile has made individuals capable of creating content, too. This capability of users brought so much fake content to the platform. Mobile media has impacted society in both positive and negative ways. Let us discuss positive impacts first.
1. Access to information: Mobile news platforms have increased access to
information. Any information is just a click away regardless of individuals' location or socioeconomic background. Before mobile media, internet- based information was only available to individuals having broadband connections. Internet penetration was low, and due to this, there was a digital divide in the society. Mobile media has bridged the digital divide and empowered individuals.
2. Consumers became prosumers: Mobile technology has democratised
news production. Now, every individual can act like a watchdog of society. Mobile technology has enabled consumers to produce content and not only consume it. This has made consumers prosumers--consumers who also produce content. The rise of citizen journalism allows common citizens to share their perspectives on an issue. It has diversified narratives and challenged the monopoly of traditional media.
3. Engagement and Participation: Mobile news platforms encourage
greater engagement and user participation. Users can participate through comments, polls and discussions. Increased participation promotes the formation of an information society and active citizens.
4. Community building: Mobile media has promoted providing information
relevant to users' immediate surroundings. Mobile users are more interested in knowing things happening locally. Many hyper-local news platforms emerged to meet this demand, strengthening community connections. There are some negative impacts also:
1. Misinformation and disinformation: Social media algorithms and
echo chambers can facilitate the spreading of false information and

biased narratives, threatening informed decision-making and democratic Mobile and News Media processes.
2. Polarisation: Personalised news feeds can limit exposure to diverse
viewpoints and reinforce existing biases, potentially leading to societal polarisation and a decline in critical thinking.
3. Addiction: The fast-paced, bite-sized nature of mobile news can
contribute to shorter attention spans and addiction to constant information consumption, impacting mental well-being and productivity.
4. Unequal access: Despite increased access, digital literacy gaps and limited
internet connectivity can still exclude certain demographics from fully participating in the mobile news ecosystem.
5. Privacy concern: Data collection and targeted advertising practices
associated with mobile news platforms raise concerns about user privacy and potential manipulation. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
3. What are the characteristics of mobile media?

4. Discuss some formats of mobile media.

3.5 LIMITATIONS AND CONCERNS
Mobile media has transformed how we consume information, connect with others, and engage with the world. However, despite its undeniable benefits, limitations and concerns are associated with its pervasive use. Following are some key issues: Limitations:
1. Small screen size and limited resolution: Mobile technology constantly
improves but cannot beat the larger displays of computers and laptops. Mobile phones have a limited scope for showing visual details. Reading on a mobile screen is also very cumbersome, especially when reading complex documents.
2. Information overload: The constant stream of notifications and constant
information received on mobile phones affect users with information overload. Various researches also show that on mobile screens, users read

Mobile And Society less, contributing to shorter attention spans and difficulty focusing on longer-form content.
3. Digital divide: Everyone needs equal access to fast and reliable internet
connections. Users in tier 2 and 3 towns, especially villages, need help accessing content. This is related to a lack of internet infrastructure. For those with fast connections, there is another problem of the content- based digital divide. In a diverse country like India, where there are many languages and dialects, people don't get content in their languages, creating another kind of digital divide.
4. Privacy concerns: Mobile devices and apps collect vast amounts of user
data, raising concerns about privacy breaches and targeted advertising practices.
5. Health risks: Excessive use of mobile devices can lead to eye strain, neck
and back pain, and sleep disturbances due to blue light exposure. Concerns:
1. Misinformation and disinformation: The rapid spread of unverified
information and fake news on social media platforms can distort public understanding of important issues and have detrimental consequences.
2. Cyberbullying: Online anonymity can encourage people to engage in
cyberbullying and harassment, creating a hostile environment for users, particularly vulnerable groups like young people.
3. Addiction: Excessive mobile media use can lead to addiction, anxiety, and
social isolation, negatively impacting mental well-being and relationships.
4. Erosion of critical thinking: Reliance on quick snippets of information on
mobile platforms can hinder the development of critical thinking skills and the ability to focus on complex topics.
5. Impact on social interactions: Overdependence on mobile communication
can diminish face-to-face interactions and weaken social bonds, leading to feelings of loneliness and isolation. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
5. Mention the three elements of mobile storytelling.

6. What are the limitations of the use of mobile media?

Mobile and News Media
3.6 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we understood how mobile media news is becoming an important source of information for users. We also learned how mobile media content differs from other media forms. We also discussed how new technologies are providing great new experiences to users. Now, users have also become news producers. Deciding what is fake and real becomes very difficult in an avalanche of information. Therefore, ethical considerations are very important for mobile platforms. Mobile media can be a powerful tool for good, but acknowledging its limitations and addressing the associated concerns is crucial for responsible and healthy use. By striking a balance and using technology thoughtfully, we can maximise the benefits of mobile media while minimising its negative impact on our lives and society. Remember, responsible usage and awareness of limitations are key to leveraging the positive aspects of mobile media while mitigating its potential pitfalls. Let's strive to create a healthy and balanced relationship with mobile technology, maximising its benefits for ourselves and others.
3.7 KEYWORDS
Cyberbullying: Use of technology to harass, threaten, embarrass or target another person Public Sphere: Arena where citizens come together, exchange opinions regarding public affairs and form public opinions Ubiquity: Property of being everywhere Augmented Reality: Interactive experience that enhances the real world with computer-generated information
3.8 FURTHER READINGS
Mobile-First Journalism: Producing News for Social and Interactive Media,
Steve Hill, Paul Bradshaw, Routledge
News for a Mobile-First Consumer, Paula M. Poindexter, Peter Lang Publishing Inc Mobile News: Journalism's Shift from Fixed to Fluid, Andrew Duffy, Rich
Ling, Nuri Kim, Edson Tandoc, Jr., Oscar Westlund, Routledge
MOJO: The Mobile Journalism Handbook: How to Make Broadcast Videos with an iPhone or iPad, Ivo Burum, Stephen Quinn, Routledge News and Democratic Citizens in the Mobile Era, Johanna Dunaway, Kathleen Searles, et al., Kalorama; Unabridged edition
3.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The following are the key trends in mobile media content: 55

Mobile And Society * Short content: Recent trends suggest that people are more interested in consuming short content. Therefore, content producers focus on producing short articles, videos, and infographics. The popularity of YouTube shorts and Facebook reels strongly supports this trend. * Personalised Content: When we consume content on smartphones, generally, we do it through news apps. These apps provide us with content and collect our watch history, search history, and interests. Based on this history, news producers create an algorithm to provide us with personalised content. * Live Streaming: As news content is consumed on smartphones, news organisations also include new ways to give users a better experience. To provide breaking news, producers need not wait for visuals and images; rather, they go for live streaming on their platform. Now, users can experience real-time feeds through live streaming. * Local News: This is another area where mobile media is concentrated. One of the important elements that defines news is proximity. People want to know about events and incidents that are taking place nearby. With mobile becoming a prominent tool for consuming news, content creators are creating apps focusing on local news only. Today, many apps provide content for a particular city or town. * Fact-Checking: This is one of the growing areas of news production. Mobile has filled the gap between news producers and consumers. Consumers also produce content through pictures, write-ups, and videos. Many platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, depend greatly on user-generated content. But when everybody is a content creator, there is always a problem of fake content circulated among users. To know whether the provided content is fake or authentic now, news organisations are creating platforms providing fact-checking.
2. Mobile media has transformed education by increasing accessibility,
enhancing engagement, providing personalised learning and better accessibility for diversified learning. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The following features characterise mobile media:
* Ubiquity: Mobile media is always a click away from us. We always keep our mobile phones with us, so this form of media has a ubiquitous presence. It enables us to access information, entertainment and communication channels. * Personalisation: This is also a key characteristic of mobile media. As we know, all the apps and websites we access record our watch history and searches. Based on that, they deliver personalised content to the users. * Interactivity: Mobile devices facilitate two-way communication and engagement, allowing users to comment, share, and actively participate in content creation.

* Real-time: Mobile media provides access to updates and information Mobile and News Media as they happen, fostering a sense of immediacy and connection. * Short content: Attention spans tend to be shorter on mobile devices, driving the creation and consumption of short-form content like videos, infographics, and bite-sized articles. * Location-based services: Mobile devices can utilise GPS and other location-based technologies to offer relevant services and information based on the user's location. * Social integration: Mobile platforms enable seamless integration with social media networks, facilitating sharing, discussion, and community building around content. * Multimodality: Mobile media incorporates text, images, audio, and video, creating a more immersive and engaging experience.
2. Some formats of mobile media are as follows:
i. Image-Based News: Image-based news can be a series of images or a single image with important information. This kind of content is eye-catching and engaging. It conveys information quickly and efficiently. However, it might need more depth and details to suit all news stories. This kind of content is usually light and gives general details of an event. ii. Video News: Video news is a multimedia presentation of news that involves presenting news through video footage, audio, and written content in one package. This kind of content is highly engaging and informative. A resourceful source can produce it, and news organisations with all the resources can generate this kind of content. Consumption of this kind of content requires high-speed internet, which is one of the limitations of this type of content. iii. Audio News/Podcasting: This is one of the fastest-growing mobile news types. People can listen to podcasts while doing other work, like driving or doing other work. This type of news is convenient for people interested in quality and in-depth analytical news. Podcasting requires focused users, who have to focus intently to understand properly. This type of content is not suitable for all environments. Check Your Progress: 3
1. The three elements identified for mobile storytelling are:
o Compelling characters o An Exciting and convincing story world o A strong storyline with clearly defined plot points
2. Some major limitations in the use of mobile media are small screen size and
limited resolution, information overload, digital divide, privacy concerns and health risks.

UNIT 4 BENEFITS OF MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Structure
4.0 Introduction
4.1 Learning Outcomes
4.2 Benefits of MoJo
4.2.1 For the Media Institutions
4.2.2 For the Newsrooms
4.2.3 For the News Professionals
4.2.4 For the News Users
4.2.5 For Prosumers
4.3 Platform Specific Benefits
4.3.1 For Photography
4.3.2 For Audio Bytes/Podcasts
4.3.3 For Video Bytes /Streaming
4.4 Let Us Sum Up
4.5 Keywords
4.6 Further Readings
4.7 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
4.0 INTRODUCTION
In the changing world of journalism, MoJo has emerged as a game changer, revolutionising how news is captured, crafted and consumed. After reading this sentence, the first thing that must have crossed your mind is, what exactly is this Mojo? Mobile journalism, or Mojo, means journalism that uses mobile devices, like smartphones and tablets, to create, edit, and share news content. Learners, you will be surprised to know that nowadays, even the most professional journalists utilise these mobile technologies to gather and produce news stories quickly and efficiently, which not only enables real-time reporting but also helps in engaging with their audience. In this Unit, we will delve deeper into mobile journalism. It is a storytelling approach that empowers journalists to be versatile content creators on the move by exploring its advantages for the various stakeholders of journalism. While discussing mobile journalism, we will understand how MoJo liberates journalists from the constraints of traditional equipment and empowers them with the agility to report from any location with unprecedented immediacy. Through this Unit, we will examine MoJo's coveted potential in contemporary journalism by shedding light on its various benefits through the lens of mobile devices. From instantly capturing audio bytes to harnessing the storytelling

power of video clips, Mojo enables innovation, efficiency, and increased Benefits of Mobile audience engagement. Journalism
4.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Explain the concept of mobile journalism and its advantages; * Explain the benefits of mobile journalism for media institutions; * Mobile Journalism's advantages on newsroom and media professionals; * Discuss benefits of mobile journalism on news users and prosumers; * Explain platform-Specific Benefits of Mobile Journalism; and * Advantages of Mobile Journalism in the context of video bytes and audio bytes.
4.2 BENEFITS OF MOJO
Now, let us begin by learning the benefits of MoJo. Learners, if you take a closer look, the advantages of mobile journalism are very much apparent from its definition. In his book, "Mobile -First Journalism: Producing News for Social and Interactive Media", Hill & Bradshaw defined mobile journalism as "the practice of using portable electronic devices to produce news stories. This includes reporting, editing, and distributing news from the field without the need for traditional, bulkier equipment." Hence, mobile journalism has been characterised by its agility, immediacy, and the integration of multimedia elements in storytelling since its inception. Mobile journalism (MoJo) also presents a range of transformative benefits in news reporting. Its cost-effectiveness, leveraging ubiquitous smartphones, democratises journalism by making it accessible to smaller organisations and citizen journalists. MoJo excels in real-time reporting, allowing journalists to capture, edit, and share news instantly, meeting the demands of a fast-paced information landscape. The versatility of storytelling is enhanced through multimedia elements like photos and videos, providing a more engaging news experience. Additionally, MoJo facilitates direct audience engagement through social media, fostering stronger connections between journalists and their audience and expanding the reach of news stories. MoJo's cost efficiency, real- time capabilities, storytelling versatility, and audience engagement contribute to a dynamic and accessible journalistic landscape. To know better the benefits of MOJO for each of its stakeholders, let us discuss them one by one in detail: Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How does MoJo-enabled portability provide an edge over traditional
journalism?

4.2.1 For the Media Institutions
Mobile Journalism has contributed immensely to the advancement of media institutions, offering the following advantages: * Portability: Learners, as you must have anticipated by now, the paramount advantage of Mobile Journalism (MoJo) for media institutions is portability or the quality of being easily carried or moved. The news reporting scene is constantly changing, and adjusting and reacting to events as they happen quickly is essential. With gadgets like tablets and smartphones, MoJo enables journalists to take their newsroom around in their pockets. Because of its mobility, journalists can now easily collect, edit, and share news information from anywhere on the road without using bulky Outside Broadcast Vans (OBV). This adaptability guarantees that media organisations may keep a competitive advantage in providing timely and pertinent news content/ articles while also speeding up news creation. * Accessibility: Now, similar to portability, accessibility or the quality of being easily approached, entered and reached, is also one of the key areas where smaller cameras are making a significant difference' (Bock, 2009, p. 206). The smaller cameras ensure reaching and accessing news from difficult geographical locations and access to social interactions without people being conscious of heavy equipment. Reporters may more readily gather and disseminate news from various venues and communities thanks to mobile journalism, which helps reflect events more inclusively. Recall for a moment the daunting video clippings of people swept off by the flood water during the landslides in Uttarakhand or the outrage created over the video clipping of the public sexual abuse of two women in Manipur lately. Many such incidents were captured and disseminated using mobile devices. * Increased Efficiency and Real-Time Reporting: Mobile journalism allows reporters to gather and transmit news stories from the field quickly. This efficiency, in turn, contributes to a faster news cycle, keeping media institutions competitive in delivering timely content (Quinn, 2013). The portability and accessibility offered by MoJo enable journalists to cover breaking news in real time. Due to these features, reporters on the ground can now quickly capture and transmit footage, allowing the institution to provide updated minute coverage (Quinn, 2013) * Cost Savings and Resource Efficiency: Learners, you must be aware that traditional journalism often requires heavy investment in editing studios, camera equipment and hiring staff for each function. However, media organisations can benefit significantly from mobile journalism (MoJo), which promises higher resource efficiency and cost savings. By using common gadgets like tablets and cellphones, MoJo disrupts this paradigm. These affordable instruments simplify the entire news creation process and

eliminate the need for expensive equipment. Journalists can capture, edit, Benefits of Mobile and share information quickly while on the go, saving time and resources. Journalism MoJo also allows journalists to take on multiple responsibilities, making the newsroom more flexible and effective while reducing the need for a large workforce. By utilising existing mobile devices, media institutions can save on equipment costs. * Enhanced Engagement with Audiences: MoJo is cost-effective and allows media organisations to enable direct audience participation. Sharing news and opinions on topical issues on various social media platforms ensures instantaneous interactions through smartphones and other mobile- friendly substances, which aids organisations in forging closer bonds with their readers or viewers (Hermida, 2019). Also, MoJo makes interactive storytelling possible with features like live polls, dynamic visuals, and audience interaction. This makes the interaction between media professionals and their viewers lively and engaging. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Mention the advantages of MoJo for Media Institutions.

4.2.2 For the Newsrooms
After discussing the benefits of MoJo for media institutions, let us move further to understand how it is advantageous for newsrooms. In a newsroom workflow, mobile devices facilitate journalists to collect, curate, edit, publish and refine the content using the browser or native app from within and outside the newsroom. Following are some of the major benefits of mobile journalism in the media newsroom:
Figure 2: Benefits of Mojo for Newsroom
Source: ANI, https://www.aninews.in/news/business/digital-media-changing- the-face-of-press-releases20190610191027/ 61

Mobile And Society * Distributed Newsrooms: If we look at the benefits enabled by MoJo, especially in the context of newsrooms, the first and foremost has to be distributed newsrooms. MoJo facilitates remote contributions from media professionals by supporting the idea of distributed newsrooms. This adaptability is especially important in the age of remote employment and decentralised news outlets. Journalists in the conventional news environment were restricted to centralised places, which hindered their ability to react quickly to events as they happened. Mojo's use of mobile devices frees journalists from this limitation. * Enhanced Collaboration: Another interesting benefit ensured by Mojo is the facilitation of collaborative journalism that allows media professionals to share content and easily collaborate on projects in real time. This means media professionals can easily share material and work together in real- time using Mojo. This function is helpful in large newsroom settings or while working on joint reporting projects. Mojo's smooth content sharing allows media professionals to collaborate quickly and effectively beyond the limitations of conventional communication methods. In addition to speeding up the news creation process, this real-time contact improves the overall synergy in big newsrooms. Mojo facilitates instantaneous project collaboration by making the media environment dynamic and integrated. * Immediate Breaking News Coverage: Mojo enables journalists to respond quickly to breaking news circumstances by recording and distributing real-time updates. Because of the immediate nature of mobile devices, newsrooms are at the forefront of covering developing events, ensuring viewers are up to date on the newest information. For example, you can visualise how journalists with cell phones may quickly go live, providing on-the-spot coverage of breaking news events such as natural catastrophes, protests, or accidents. Also, you should know that such immediacy speeds up news delivery and contributes to the depth and authenticity of reporting. The capacity to respond quickly and efficiently to dynamic events shows how Mojo alters conventional newsrooms, allowing them to adapt to the needs of modern news reporting and engage viewers with personal stories. * Integration with Multimedia Storytelling: Newsrooms may use Mojo's multimedia capabilities to improve their narratives. How? Combining text, graphics, videos, and interactive features seamlessly converts news material into more immersive and fascinating tales. Now, you can imagine how this approach makes it easier to cater to a wide range of audience tastes while adding depth and complexity to the narrative process. That is not it; using many media elements also provides a more complete and dynamic portrayal of news items. In a nutshell, Mojo's multimedia features enable newsrooms to create captivating stories that connect with today's varied and technologically savvy audiences more successfully. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Mention the advantages of MoJo in the day-to-day workflow of a newsroom.

62

Benefits of Mobile
Journalism

4.2.3 For News Professionals
In the previous sections, we have learnt how the contemporary concept of MoJo has revolutionised media institutes and newsrooms. In this section, we will understand how it eases the work of media professionals.
Figure 3: Mojo-Enabled Portability: Benefits for Media Professionals
Source: iStock, https://www.istockphoto.com/search/2/image- film?phrase=mobile+journalism Research: Learners, the utility of MoJo for journalists begins right from the pre-production phase of news content. Journalists can use mobile devices for research, accessing information, conducting interviews, fact-checking, and staying updated on news developments. Here are some ways mobile devices contribute to the research aspect of journalism. * Information Retrieval: Just like you use your mobile devices to garner information on the topics of your choice, journalists, too, can access a great quantity of information on the Internet via mobile devices, allowing them to quickly gather background material, statistics, and historical context pertinent to their news content. This can be done through mobile devices to access online libraries, research papers, and other academic resources, allowing them to do an in-depth study on various issues. * Interviews and Communication: Besides information retrieval, journalists can also conduct interviews using mobile devices through standard phone calls or video conferencing apps. This increases the flexibility with which information may be gathered from sources even when the source is not physically present. * Social Media Monitoring: Mobile devices are also useful for tracking breaking news, trends, and public reactions on social media platforms. Journalists can thus remain current on developments and interact with the online community. * Fact-Checking on the Go: One of MoJo's most important advantages for journalists is using mobile devices to fact-check material in real time. This helps journalists ensure the accuracy of their reporting before publishing. 63

Mobile And Society * Location-Based Research: Finally, during the phase of research, journalists can also perform location-based research using mobile devices equipped with GPS. This is especially beneficial for on-the-ground reporting and investigative reporting.
Efficient Workflow Management
Besides aiding during research, MoJo simplifies media professionals' workflow management by providing a single device for capturing, editing, and distributing information. This integrated method, on the other hand, improves field efficiency and decreases the need for different instruments.
Quick Response to Emergencies
Also, how convenient is MoJo for media workers to respond promptly in emergencies? Unlike traditional journalism, MoJo can now be used for coming news to send real-time chiral measurements for more timely and accurate reporting.
Personal Branding
Another recent change you have observed is the identification of media professionals as personal brands. MoJo also encourages this Phenomenon. Media workers may use MoJo to improve their brand by directly connecting with viewers on social media, establishing a more accurate and instantaneous relationship. For example, Ravish Kumar started his YouTube channel to connect to his audience. To sum up all these benefits of MoJo for media professionals, we can now conveniently say that by giving tools for independent reporting, mobile journalism empowers journalists in multiple ways.
4.2.4 For the News Users
After learning about the pros of MoJo for media professionals, let us understand next what benefits MoJo has to offer to its users. Mobile Journalism (MoJo) brings several advantages for news consumers, enhancing their experience and interaction with news content. Here are ways in which MoJo benefits news users: * Immediate Access to Breaking News: As discussed in this Unit with MoJo, journalists can report and share breaking news in real-time. News users may also benefit from this by getting instant updates and remaining updated on current events as they develop. * Direct Interaction and Feedback: Like media professionals, news consumers can now utilise MoJo to interact directly with journalists and news organisations via social media platforms. MoJo encourages a more interactive relationship by allowing users to comment, ask questions, and engage in discussions. * Personalised Content Consumption: You must have noticed that you need more of an option to consume the information or content of your choice at your convenience in the case of traditional journalism (like

television news or newspapers). MoJo, however, offers you the option Benefits of Mobile for personalised content consumption, as you can now view and engage Journalism with content tailored to your interests. This adaptability enhances the user experience by providing relevant and customised news. Besides, MoJo also allows you to consume content on demand. You can access news stories at your convenience, providing flexibility in when and how you engage with the news. * Increased Transparency: As you know, MoJo enables instantaneous reporting and direct engagement with journalists. These features, in turn, ensure transparency in the news reporting process. Users may watch live events and participate in conversations that help them comprehend news stories better. * Community Building: Besides, MoJo's interactive features and social media integration help news consumers form communities. Users may join based on common interests, engage in discussions, and create virtual communities around certain news subjects. * Citizen Journalism Contributions: One of the most remarkable achievements of MoJo is that it enables individuals to participate in news reporting through user-generated material, which is technically called citizen journalism. This allows everyone, from you to me, to ministers to a rickshaw puller, with affordable mobile devices to report news and express their opinions on current events, encouraging a more active and democratic media environment. We will see in the further section how the concept of MoJo-enabled citizen journalism blurs the line between the consumer and producer.
4.2.5 For the Prosumers
Learners, it must be very interesting to know that the advent of social media has swiftly blurred the line between the "producers" and "consumers", giving rise to the newer concept of "prosumers". "Prosumer" is a portmanteau or the mix of two words, "producer" and "consumer". It refers to individuals who play a dual role in producing and consuming content. In media, prosumers actively consume news and information and contribute to content creation and distribution. Let us see how the emergence of mobile journalism can benefit the prosumers:
* Facilitator of Citizen Journalism and User-Generated Content: As
you have learnt in this chapter, MoJo facilitates citizen journalism that allows consumers to report on events and issues that matter to them. MoJo's accessibility allows consumers to be on the scene, capturing and sharing news stories from their unique perspectives. This implies that MoJo empowers consumers to contribute to news reporting through user-generated content. Prosumers may actively participate in the news- generating process by capturing and sharing photographs, videos, and personal narratives.

Figure 2: Citizen Journalism Source: Adobe Stock, https://stock.adobe.com/in/ search?k=%22citizen+journalism%22 * Hyper-localised news coverage: Unlike traditional journalism, MoJo- enabled prosumers may respond quickly to local events and developments. They may record and disseminate relevant news articles to their communities, adding to hyper-localised news coverage. Therefore, you can now get information/ news without a professional media person on the site. * Social Media Integration: MoJo's integration with social media platforms seamlessly facilitates the dissemination of user-generated news, permitting consumers to share content directly with their online communities. This direct interaction, in turn, multiplies the reach of user-generated material. * Crowd-sourced Journalism Collaborations: We have already discussed how "enhanced collaboration" is one of MoJo's advantages for media professionals in a newsroom. Similarly, MoJo facilitates crowd-sourced journalism collaborations. Prosumers can collaborate with other content creators, journalists, and organisations, contributing to collective news reporting and storytelling efforts. * Accessibility for Diverse Voices: MoJo also encourages a democratic media environment. This is ensured by allowing consumers from all walks of life to offer their perspectives. This inclusiveness helps to create a more diverse and representative media environment. Hence, next time you seem to have an opinion on the news on your social media, try not to keep it to yourself and share it with others on the same platform, contributing to strengthening democracy. * Upskilling and Access to Niche Topics: Aspiring journalists can use MoJo to hone their skills by getting instant feedback on their content. Consumers who are interested in a specific niche topic may also use MoJo to produce content that is suited to their needs. This enables the investigation and coverage of subjects that may need to gain wide coverage in conventional media. * Global Reach and Influence: MoJo also allows prosumers to reach a worldwide audience with their work. So, even if you are not working for a professional media house but are skilled, you may influence and engage with audiences worldwide because of social media integration and the 66 ubiquitous dissemination of mobile-generated content.

Benefits of Mobile
4.3 PLATFORM SPECIFIC BENEFITS
Journalism Learners, till now, we have discussed how MoJo has emerged as useful for its various stakeholders, including the media institutes, media professionals, consumers and prosumers. Let us have a look at its various benefits in the context of each social media platform. Mobile Journalism (MoJo) provides special benefits on numerous platforms, taking advantage of the unique qualities and characteristics of each. Following are some of the platform-specific advantages of the smooth practice of MoJo:
* Instagram: Visual Storytelling and Story Highlights
If one uses Instagram, he/she must be aware that it is primarily a visual/audio- visual-centric platform. For such a platform, MoJo seems an excellent choice. Journalists may utilise their mobile devices to take captivating images and short films, making information visually appealing and shareable. Also, MoJo allows journalists to generate and share story highlights on Instagram, creating a dynamic and accessible record of their news coverage. * YouTube: Vlogs and Live-Streaming Although Instagram seems ideal for short videos, YouTube is handy for full- length vlogs and documentaries. MoJo allows journalists to make vlogs and short documentaries directly from their mobile devices and disseminate them by uploading them to YouTube channels. Live streaming is another feature of YouTube that journalists or consumers can utilise via MoJo. They may use MoJo to live-stream various important events or newsworthy occurrences on YouTube, which allows for real-time contact with the audience and fast coverage of events.
* X: Hashtags and Focused Communication
X or Twitter also holds some specific benefits for the practice of MoJo by new- age journalists. For example, one must be familiar that one distinct feature of X

Mobile And Society is "hashtags". Journalists may use relevant hashtags to boost the discoverability of their work. They can participate in existing conversations and reach a larger audience interested in certain topics. Compared to other social media sites, the virality and trending nature of X (Twitter) hashtags allow MoJo- generated content to reach a larger and more diversified audience. As a result, using hashtags strategically is a Twitter-specific benefit that Mojo practitioners may leverage to increase the exposure and impact of their mobile journalism material. Also, if one thinks rationally, even the 280-character constraint on X (formerly Twitter) seems like a blessing in disguise for MoJo. Due to this limitation, mobile journalists must be innovative and emphasise crucial elements in their message. This necessitates distilling complicated topics into powerful narratives, a trait lacking in platforms with more generous character restrictions. * Facebook: Unprecedented Reach The statistics reveal that Facebook is the most used social media platform globally, with 2.9 million monthly active users worldwide (Statista, 2023). Hence, the most obvious advantage of this platform for MoJo is its diverse audience and unprecedented reach. With 2.9 billion monthly active users, Facebook gives an unmatched audience reach for Mojo-generated content. Journalists may leverage this enormous user base to share news and communicate with a broad global audience quickly. Its exclusive advantages are real-time features, multimedia-friendly settings, 360-degree videos, interactive features, community-building tools, and low cost. These advantages make it a particularly useful platform for Mobile Journalism practitioners. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. State with examples of some distinct features of YouTube and Facebook
that facilitate mobile journalism.

4.3.1 For Photography Benefits of Mobile
Journalism We have already discussed how various significant social media platforms aid MoJo. Now, let us learn about MoJo's advantages, specifically in the context of photography. In photography, MoJo offers a diverse yet effective platform for journalists to record, edit, and distribute visual information. It encourages a more dynamic and rapid approach to visual storytelling. Let us understand them one by one.
Figure 5: Benefits of Mojo for Photography
Source: Free Icons Library, https://icon-library.com/icon/camera-phone-icon-0. html
* Immediate Capture of Moments, Portability and Accessibility
To begin with, unlike traditional journalism, MoJo allows journalists to capture moments as they happen. We have already discussed earlier that the compact size of mobile devices enables journalists to carry a powerful camera with them wherever they go. This accessibility guarantees that photographers are constantly ready to chronicle events, even if they are unexpected or difficult. Mobile devices' instant access to the camera enables rapid and spontaneous shooting, which ensures that critical moments are not missed. Hence, there is no need to carry sophisticated cameras and lights and set them on tripods to take pictures. * Versatility in Photography Styles Also, the use of mobile devices supports experimentation with a variety of photographic genres. Journalists may utilise mobile devices to experiment with diverse methods and views, ranging from standard photojournalism to creative and artistic approaches. * Real-Time Photo Editing Learners in conventional journalism have a dedicated photo/video editor who edits photos/videos after receiving them from the reporter. However, with the advent of MoJo, real-time picture/video editing software is available on mobile devices/tablets. Hence, the reporters can now edit and improve their pictures/ videos after clicking/recording them. The instant edit ensures the news content is ready for publishing or social media distribution.

Mobile And Society * Integration with Social Media and Live Photo Sharing Besides being beneficial for on-the-spot editing, MoJo allows journalists to share photos in real time on various social media platforms or the organisation's online websites or pages, providing audiences with immediate visual updates. Mojo interacts smoothly with social networking channels, allowing photographers to share their work with audiences directly. The immediate sharing of visual material expands its reach and effect. Live photo sharing is especially impactful in breaking news situations, where visuals are crucial in conveying the story. * Live Streaming MoJo's live streaming feature has made covering events live more convenient. MoJo enhances photography by allowing photographers and viewers to communicate in real time. This real-time interaction gives viewers a personal peek at the creative process, encouraging openness and authenticity. Furthermore, live streaming allows for interactive contact, allowing photographers to reply to comments and inquiries, resulting in a dynamic and engaging experience. * Interactive Photo Features Learners and mobile devices also support characteristics that provide photography with an immersive depth, which allows journalists to generate more interesting visual material. For example, mobile devices can support interactive picture features such as 360-degree photographs and augmented reality (AR). While 360-degree photographs capture a whole scene, allowing viewers to study it from every aspect. Augmented Reality (AR) is the addition of computer-generated components to the actual environment to enhance the user's perspective. Both technologies provide photography, the narrative immersive and interactive qualities.
4.3.2 For Audio Bytes/ Podcasts
It is not just photography; one must know that MoJo comes in handy even when taking audio bytes or producing podcasts for journalistic purposes. Mobile journalism has made a paradigm shift regarding audio storytelling, giving journalists unparalleled immediacy and flexibility in capturing and sharing audio information. Let us discuss some of the benefits MoJo offers, particularly in the context of audio bytes or podcasts. Since we are considering the positive implications of MoJo of audio bytes, the first advantage that has to be mentioned is the on-the-spot recording and reporting. The ability of Mobile Journalism (MoJo) to record and report spontaneously is a major advantage, particularly when it comes to obtaining real audio bytes. Reporters equipped with cell phones may quickly capture interviews, ambient sounds, and breaking news, offering unfiltered footage in real time. In contrast, traditional journalism may be delayed due to technical limits and logistical obstacles. MoJo's agility provides real-time coverage, creating a feeling of immediacy and authenticity. Unlike the traditional, potentially time- consuming, and less flexible technique, quickly collecting and sharing audio bytes enables journalists to present a more dynamic and responsive account of events, increasing the audience's connection to unfolding stories.

Besides, mobile devices with MoJo capabilities make conducting interviews Benefits of Mobile easier. Journalists can quickly collect various opinions and voices, creating a Journalism more inclusive and dynamic audio story. Another comparative advantage of MoJo over traditional journalism is adaptable scripting. MoJo supports customisable scripting, which allows journalists the flexibility to record programmed audio bytes. This flexibility is especially useful for various content genres, from quick news updates to in- depth feature pieces. Shifting between scripted and unscripted content allows journalists to accommodate various audience tastes, resulting in a varied and compelling audio narrative experience. MoJo's audio bytes enable journalists to capture and distribute narratives from remote or difficult locations. Journalists can capture the ambience of these locations through rich audio storytelling, whether they are reporting from a rural town or a remote location. Especially in today's fast-paced world, when everyone is in a rush and cannot pay focused attention to books or videos, podcasts seem like a solution to remain updated. MoJo caters to on-the-go consumers with the simplicity of mobile access, giving fast, digestible, and dynamic information via podcasts. Its agility is in sync with today's lifestyle, allowing users to be informed and engaged throughout commuting, exercising, and daily activities. The ability to absorb material in audio forms allows for multitasking, smoothly integrating into the hectic schedules of those who prefer to listen rather than watch or read. MoJo's flexibility in meeting modern time restrictions makes it an invaluable tool for fulfilling the changing demands of today's audiences.
4.3.3 For Video Bytes/ Streaming
Learners, just like audio bytes, MoJo have distinctive advantages over video bytes. MoJo's dramatic influence on video journalism is similarly noticeable, providing journalists with unparalleled visual narrative and live transmission opportunities. Let us get an insight into them one by one. As discussed earlier, one of MoJo's distinguishing characteristics is the freedom it provides journalists from the limits of traditional, heavy equipment. Journalists can now easily collect video bytes with only a cell device, eliminating the need for bulky camera equipment. This unrestricted movement translates to a new degree of flexibility for journalists, allowing them to be flexible and sensitive to emerging events without sacrificing the quality of their visual narrative. MoJo's mobility is demonstrated by its quick setup time. Imagine being a journalist: You can now instantly go from taking audio bytes to recording video, decreasing the delay between modes of news generation. The ease of setup improves the whole workflow, allowing journalists to focus on storytelling rather than technical preparations. Since we are discussing video bytes, MoJo enabled the feature to stream live video, which cannot be left. Now, journalists can transmit live video bytes

Mobile And Society from the site, giving viewers an unedited and real-time glimpse of events. The immediate nature of live streaming encourages a stronger bond between journalists and their audiences, changing news consumption into a participatory practice. Also, MoJo simplifies the video editing process, allowing journalists to edit and publish high-quality content. MoJo gives journalists fast access to editing capabilities on their mobile devices. Talking in the context of video bytes, one should also realise that MoJo's mobility is supported by improved field connection. Journalists can now use mobile devices to connect to newsrooms, post material, and interact with audiences. This connectedness keeps journalists in the loop and allows them to adapt their coverage to changing developments in the field. Finally, MoJo's mobility allows adaptability in shooting situations. It helps journalists easily move and collect video bytes in dense metropolitan situations, isolated areas, or limited spaces. MoJo's versatility in various shooting settings allows journalists to cover topics in previously difficult environments for standard camera setups. .
4.4 LET'S SUM UP
In this chapter, we have understood the various benefits of Mobile Journalism (MOJO) for its stakeholders. We discussed its advantages for media institutions, newsrooms, and media professionals. We also looked at how MOJO positively impacts news consumers and consumers. Furthermore, we developed an understanding of how specific social media platforms like YouTube, Instagram, and Facebook facilitate the practice of mobile journalism. Then, the Unit moved forward to explain the benefits of mobile journalism specific to photography. Finally, we concluded the Unit by discussing how mobile journalism has revolutionised the concepts of audio and video bytes. In a nutshell, the chapter provided a comprehensive idea of the advantages of mobile journalism in the contemporary world of journalism.
4.5 KEYWORDS
MOJO (Mobile Journalism) is the practice of using portable electronic devices to produce news stories. This includes reporting, editing, and distributing news from the field without needing traditional, bulkier equipment. Breaking News: Information being received and broadcast about an event that has just happened or begun. Podcast: An audio file similar to a radio broadcast, which can be downloaded and listened to on a computer, mp3 player, mobile phone, etc. Video Bytes: Video Byte is a 1-2 minute overview of your work. This video is 72 geared towards a lay audience and shows the impact of your work on society.

Live Streaming: Live streaming is when the streamed video is sent over the Benefits of Mobile Internet in real-time without first being recorded and stored. Journalism Prosumers: This is a portmanteau or mix of two words, "producer" and "consumer ."It refers to individuals who play a dual role in producing and consuming content.
4.6 FURTHER READINGS
1. Aviles, J.A.G., Leon, B., Sanders, K., Harrison, J. (2004). Journalists at
digital television newsrooms in Britain and Spain: Workflow and multi- skilling in a competitive environment, Journalism Studies, 5 (1), 87-100
2. Brown, H., Guskin, E., Mitchell, A. (2012). The Role of Social Media in
the Arab Uprisings, Pew Research Center, URL: http://www.journalism. org/2012/11/28/role-social-media-arabuprisings/
3. Burum, I. (2016). Democratising journalism through mobile media: The
mojo revolution, New York, Routledge
4. Burum, I. (2017). Mojo Workin' - Essential Mobile Journalism Tools,
Global Investigative Journalism Network, URL: http://gijn.org/2017/04/11/
mojo-workin-essential-mobilejournalism-tools/
5. Hemmingway, E. (2008). Into the Newsroom: Exploring the Digital
Production of Regional Television News, London, Routledge
6. Hermida, A. (2016). Tell everyone Why we share and why it matters.
Anchor Canada.
7. Karhunen, P. (2017). Closer to the story? Accessibility and mobile
journalism. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. University of Oxford.
8. Quinn, S. (2013). Mobile phones and journalism, in Bruck, B. A. and Rao
M, Global Mobile: Applications and Innovations for the Worldwide Mobile Ecosystem, New Jersey, Information Today, Inc., 213-226. Available from: http://site.ebrary.com.
9. Statista (2023), Most popular social networks worldwide as of October
2023, ranked by number of monthly active users, https://www.statista.com/ statistics/272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-number-of-users/
10. Wallace, S. (2009). Watchdog or witness? The emerging forms and practices
of videojournalism, Journalism, 10 (5), 684-701
11. Wallace, S. (2013). The complexities of convergence: Multiskilled
journalists working in BBC regional multimedia newsrooms, The International Communication Gazette, 75(1), 99-117
12. Wenger, D.H. & Potter, D. (2012). Advancing the Story - Broadcast
Journalism in a Multimedia World, Washington D.C., CQ Press.
13. Westlund, O. (2013). Mobile News, Digital Journalism, 1 (1), 6-26
White, T. and Barnas, F. (2011) Broadcast News - Writing, Reporting and Producing, 5th ed., Burlington, Focal Press

4.7 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1 Mobile journalism is characterised by its agility, immediacy, and the integration of multimedia elements in storytelling. Its cost-effectiveness, leveraging ubiquitous smartphones, democratises journalism by making it accessible to smaller organisations and citizen journalists. MoJo excels in real-time reporting, allowing journalists to capture, edit, and share the news instantly. The versatility of storytelling is enhanced through multimedia elements like photos and videos, providing a more engaging news experience. Additionally, MoJo facilitates direct audience engagement through social media, fostering stronger connections between journalists and their audience and expanding the reach of news stories. MoJo's cost efficiency, real-time capabilities, storytelling versatility, and audience engagement contribute to a dynamic and accessible journalistic landscape. Check Your Progress: 2
Portability; Accessibility; Increased Efficiency and Real-time Time Reporting;
Cost Savings and Resource Efficiency; and Enhanced Engagement with
Audiences. Check Your Progress: 3
Distributed Newsrooms; Enhanced Collaboration; Immediate Breaking News
Coverage; and Integration with Multimedia Storytelling. Check Your Progress: 4
YouTube: Vlogs and Live-Streaming
YouTube is handy for full-length vlogs and documentaries. MoJo allows journalists to make vlogs and short documentaries directly from their mobile devices and disseminate them by uploading them to YouTube channels. Live streaming is another feature of YouTube that journalists or consumers can utilise via MoJo. They may use MoJo to live-stream various important events or newsworthy occurrences on YouTube, which allows for real-time contact with the audience and fast coverage of events.
Facebook: Unprecedented Reach
The most obvious advantage of this platform for MoJo is the diverse audience and the unprecedented reach. With 2.9 billion monthly active users, Facebook gives an unmatched audience reach for Mojo-generated content. Journalists may leverage this enormous user base to share news and communicate with a broad global audience quickly. Its exclusive advantages are real-time features, multimedia-friendly settings,

360-degree videos, interactive features, community-building tools, and low Benefits of Mobile cost. These advantages make it a particularly useful platform for Mobile Journalism Journalism practitioners.

UNIT 5 MOBILE NEWS CONSUMPTION
PATTERNS
Structure
5.0 Introduction
5.1 Learning Outcomes
5.2 News for Citizens Vs Consumers
5.2.1 Citizens Vs. Consumers
5.2.2 Theories Related to Consumer Preferences
5.2.3 Impact of Consumer Preferences on News Production
5.3 Media and Its Advantages in News Consumption
5.3.1 Print Media
5.3.2 Electronic and Digital Media
5.4 Snacking/ Grazing on the News
5.5 Mobile News Consumption: Patterns, People, Place and Participation
5.6 Reuters Institute's Digital News Report 2023: Key Findings
5.7 National and Global Challenges Due to Changes in News
Consumption Patterns
5.8 Mobile News Consumption and Rise of Misinformation and
Disinformation
5.9 Future of Mobile News and Its Impact
5.10 Let Us Sum Up
5.11 Keywords
5.12 Further Readings
5.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
5.0 INTRODUCTION
Learners, imagine yourself leisurely perusing your social media feed, keeping up with your friends' latest posts. Suddenly, your attention is drawn to a headline. You are engrossed in the most recent advancements while reading a news item on your mobile device, which is a comfortable environment. We will discuss that in this unit when we address mobile news consumption. Now, this mobile news thing is more than just a fleeting trend. Mobile phones constitute the sixth mass media after printing records, movies, radio, television, and the Internet. Do you recall those large newspapers and certain news periodicals? With customisable feeds, social network integration, and even user-generated material at your fingertips, mobile news completely disregards

convention. Regarding convenience, research indicates that mobile news is the Mobile News most user-friendly and beneficial. Your phone provides instantaneous updates Consumption Patterns whenever and wherever you are; forget about carrying a laptop or waiting for the nightly news. The fact that 72% of Americans rely on their phones for news (Pew Research Center, 2023) and check for updates many times a day (Reuters Institute, 2023) helps to explain the rise in mobile news consumption. This is the same scenario throughout the world. However, there is also the other side of it. Yes, we continuously check our phones, but such interactions are short- lived--they only last a few minutes (Reuters Institute, 2023). Our ability to focus seems to be waning as a result. Slogans, teases, and little films take centre stage, with lengthier pieces falling to the wayside. In this unit, we will gain insight into the contemporary phenomenon of mobile news consumption and its pervasiveness in the modern world. We will also analyse the pros and cons of the same. Figure 1: Mobile News (Source: Freepik, www.freepik.com)
5.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Differentiate between news for Citizens and Consumers; * Describe different theories related to consumer preferences; * Analyse the impact of consumer preferences on news production; * Discuss different media and their advantages in news consumption; * Conceptualise the idea of snacking/ grazing on the news; * Describe the 4Ps of Mobile News Consumption: Patterns, People, Place
and Participation;
* Analyse the key findings of Reuters Institute & Digital News Report 2023 and how the Covid-19 has impacted the news consumption; * Locate the national and global challenges due to changes in news consumption patterns; and * Examine the future of mobile news and its impact.

5.2 NEWS FOR CITIZENS VS CONSUMERS
Learners, you have probably observed an excessive amount of information available in today's news environment; much of it occupies a vague middle ground between educating the public and entertaining readers. This may have confused you since it raises a basic question: What is in the public's best interests? News intended primarily for amusement and transient engagement, or news that fosters educated democratic participation? By examining the distinctions between "news for citizens" and "news for consumers," one can better comprehend the answers to these questions. Fundamentally, news for citizens is a necessary component of a robust democracy. It delves into complex topics, provides in-depth analysis, and promotes critical thinking. This increased level of involvement allows citizens to engage actively in public life. Investigative journalism best shows this concept, which exposes injustices, holds institutions of power responsible and sparks vital public conversation. Investigative journalism makes society's problems more visible, enables people to demand change, and promotes social justice. However, the contemporary environment also prioritises leisure and personal fulfilment to satisfy the customer. This strategy frequently uses attention- grabbing headlines, celebrity rumours, and customised material feeds catering to niche audiences and limited attention spans. Even though this material could draw in a larger audience, it risks forgoing depth and meaningful involvement in favour of transient engagement and light pleasure. The emphasis moves from comprehending complicated problems to short bursts that offer transient entertainment or approval. The whole shift is towards infotainment. Figure 2: Citizen Vs Consumer (Sources: Created by Gan Khoon Lay, from The Noun Project, and Flaticon, www.flaticon.com )
5.2.1 Citizens Vs. Consumers
So, learners, think briefly about how a 'consumer' differs from a 'citizen'. In academic terms, consumers are primarily motivated by personal demands and market pressures, whereas citizens are concerned with the common good and their obligations to the state. Customers have market-driven agency through their choices, but citizens have political agency through their involvement in democracy.

Especially when you look at the divide between 'citizen' and 'consumer', Mobile News especially in the context of news consumption and creation, you will notice that Consumption Patterns the basic distinction lies in perspective and intent. Citizens, as news consumers, view information with a civic mindset, aiming to keep informed in order to participate actively in democratic processes. Their motives stem from a duty to contribute significantly to society, encouraging civic participation through voting and community involvement. In contrast, news consumers view information as a commodity, motivated by personal preferences or entertainment value. This thinking might result in more passive news consumption, giving sensationalism or validating pre-existing opinions precedence over civic duties. Citizens and consumers differ in how they produce news, with citizens contributing to public debate through community reporting, participatory journalism, and educated conversations. On the other hand, consumers indirectly shape news agendas based on entertainment value rather than public service through market-driven preferences. There is a crucial distinction between media literacy and critical thinking. While consumers may not always have the disposition for such judgement, citizens must actively assess sources and do fact-checking. Ultimately, it is critical to grasp these differences to appreciate how media consumption is changing fully and its significant effects on democratic societies. Maintaining the integrity of democratic ideas requires striking a balance between the demand for a critically aware and involved populace and consumerist inclinations. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Differentiate between Citizens and Consumers?

5.2.2 Theories Related to Consumer Preferences
In the contemporary digital landscape, the consumer preferences of mobile news consumption can be better understood through the lens of the following theories: * Scarcity Theory of Attention Paying attention is a valuable asset in a world where information is abundant. Content that instantly captures their interest has a strong visual presence, and provides instant satisfaction is given priority by consumers. This is especially true when consuming news on the go, as innumerable diversions and bite- sized material quickly divert our attention. According to the hypothesis, our capacity for processing information is finite, much like a finite energy pool. We prioritise the stimulus that quickly grabs our attention when presented with many competing options. This translates to attention-grabbing headlines, eye- catching images that flash across the screen, and short-form films that offer 79

Mobile And Society immediate information or entertainment in the mobile news space. Like vividly coloured sweets, these attention-grabbing morsels tempt us with the promise of a rapid dopamine rush, frequently at the price of more complex, nuanced information. * Theory of Social Currency According to the social currency theory's fundamental tenets, users appreciate material they can debate and share with others in their social networks, elevating their status and creating virtual communities. This inclination is a boon for platforms that profit from user-generated content and viral trends. Not only is information consumed in the flurry of mobile news consumption, but it is also shared, exchanged, and turned into social currency. According to social currency theory, content shared online has value in addition to its inherent worth. Its social significance--its capacity to indicate our affiliation with particular groups, interests, and ideologies--is the source of this worth. A thoughtful piece on climate change, a clever political tweet, or a well-captioned joke may all act as digital tokens, building social capital and fostering relationships on the Internet. Therefore, the theory offers a useful framework for comprehending how people utilise news material on their mobile devices to establish online identities, signal allegiance, and improve their social status. * Theory of Social Presence Social Presence theory was initially published in "The Social Psychology of Telecommunications" by John Short, Ederyn Williams, and Bruce Christie. It was built upon the theoretical underpinnings of interpersonal communication and symbolic interactionism. Social Presence Theory looks at how user engagement and trust are impacted by the "realness" or "immediacy" users perceive in news material when consuming it on a mobile device. It claims that although news content is important in and of itself, user engagement and trust are surprisingly shaped by the sense of connection that one has with the material and the source. One might feel they are "present" at the news event using interactive features, live-streamed reporting, and reporter comments accompanied by images. Building rapport and trust may increase the audience's openness to the information. Additionally, news platforms may help close the gap between passive viewers and active participants by promoting user involvement through polls, comments, and Q&A sessions. This reciprocal communication can improve the impression of social presence when appropriately managed. Selective exposure and Uses and Gratification Theory are other related theories that may be applied to understand the preferences of mobile news consumers. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the Theory of Social Currency?

80

5.2.3 Impact of Consumer Preferences on News Production Mobile News
Consumption Patterns
After learning about the theories of consumer preferences, let us now try to comprehend how consumer preference implicates news production in the current media landscape. Explaining how customer choices affect the creation of news, Franklin (1997) states that the editorial goals of journalism have shifted. If you look at studies, it reveals that the information provision has given way to entertainment; public interest has taken the place of human interest; reasoned analysis has given way to emotionalism; the trivial has triumphed over the serious; and the private lives of celebrities, whether from soap operas, professional sports, or the royal family, are now deemed more "newsworthy" than the coverage of important issues and events with global implications. (Franklin, 1997, p. 4). New values have supplanted traditional ones, and "infotainment" is pervasive. There is testimony that tabloid newspapers have mostly stopped covering topics that do not draw readers because they are driven by market research. This has inevitably resulted in increased crime tales, sports coverage, and celebrity rumours but decreased international news and government coverage. The amount of time that broadsheets cover Parliament has decreased. These critics contend that contemporary news media's consumer-centred and market-driven structure has fostered declining news provision tendencies. Viewers' capacity to participate in political life is undermined if unimportant stories overshadow significant news. According to Bennett (1992), a media outlet that is preoccupied with the spectacle of news has the potential to deprive its audience of the ability to engage actively in political life. They are no longer active participants in the democratic dialogue but passive recipients. Data also show that contrary to popular belief, a news organisation's reputation or brand influences customers' choice of where to get news. This is especially true for mobile devices, as opposed to desktop or laptop computers. Indeed, suggestions from friends do not yet play a significant role in determining how much news is consumed, even despite the increase in the usage of social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter.
5.3 MEDIA AND ITS ADVANTAGES IN NEWS
CONSUMPTION
Media has a big impact on how we receive and consume news, and it has several benefits over more conventional approaches like word-of-mouth or printed newspapers. In the modern world, news consumption requires a diversified strategy because several media platforms are vying for viewers' attention. Every media, from print newspapers to the instantaneous world of digital media, has certain benefits when learning about current affairs. While concentrated interaction with in-depth material in conventional print media stimulates deep cognitive processing and critical analysis, digital platforms guarantee immediacy and accessibility through personalised content streams and real-time updates. On the one hand, broadcast media, a long-standing institution, engages viewers through engaging visual narratives and shared experiences. However, digital media stands out for its unequalled interaction

Mobile And Society and community-driven conversation. The following are the media-specific advantages of news consumption:
5.3.1 Print Media
Despite being perceived as outdated, print media offers unique advantages for news consumption that set it apart from its digital counterparts. * For instance, studies prove that reading print literature instead of reading digitally improves comprehension and deeper cognitive processing. Print's materiality and linear structure promote reading more slowly, actively engaging with the text, and retaining information better. This is especially useful for factual or sophisticated information. * In contrast to digital platforms, which offer endless notifications and incentives to multitask, the paper provides a distraction-free atmosphere. * The tangible quality of print media might offer an impression of reliability in an era of 'fake news' and online disinformation. According to research by Wojciesiak and Wen (2018) and Newman et al. (2015), consumers often view print media as trustworthy and reputable than internet sources. Figure 3: Advantages of Print Media News Consumption (Source: Free Icon Library, https://icon-library.com/icon/print-media-icon-16.html.html) * Reading in print may be an immersive experience that increases emotional involvement and fosters a closer bond with the news content. Research conducted by Stone (1989) and Harris (2005) indicates that print readers exhibit superior knowledge memory and a more intense emotional reaction to tales than their digital counterparts. * Time spent on digital screens has been connected to higher levels of stress, anxiety, and disturbed sleep. Reading in print can help you unwind and provide a mental break from the never-ending brightness and scrolling. According to research by Wallach et al. (2015) and Park et al. (2019), reading on paper can improve general well-being and lessen digital tiredness. * Print news provides a distinctive sensory experience in contrast to the impersonal interface of digital screens. * The feel of paper, the scent of ink, and the visual arrangement of text and images may all contribute to an aesthetically attractive and engaging 82 reading experience.

5.3.2 Electronic and Digital Media Mobile News
Consumption Patterns
Let us start by understanding what electronic and digital media refer to. Electronic media refers to a wide range of communication technologies that rely on electronically created and delivered material. The scope of electronic media is continually shifting as technology advances and user tastes shift. However, some key categories include (a) broadcast media (that includes traditional television and radio channels streaming services offering similar content), (b) digital media (that includes websites, online news portals, social media platforms, mobile apps, digital publishing platforms), (c) interactive media (video games, virtual reality experiences, augmented reality applications), and (d) new media (emerging technologies like artificial intelligence-powered content). While print media has its merits, electronic media dominates the current news environment, providing information with unprecedented speed, reach, and flexibility. Following are some of its advantages: Figure 4: Electronic Media (Source: Flaticon, www.flaticon.com) Figure 5: Digital Media News Consumption (Source: Flaticon, www.flaticon. com) * Broadcast media allows immediate access to breaking news and live events, frequently reaching greater audiences simultaneously than internet channels. This is especially important in fast-changing events like natural catastrophes or major breaking news. Studies have shown that television remains the preferred news source during important events, proving its capacity to swiftly cut through the noise and reach huge audiences. (Wojciesiak & Wen, 2018; Newman et al., 2015) * Multimedia learning can boost knowledge retention and engagement, underlining the benefits of broadcast media in presenting news effectively (Salomon, 2008). * Broadcast media can reach those with limited technology or live in places with inadequate internet access. This guarantees that everyone has the chance to keep informed, regardless of socio-economic status or technology literacy. According to the Pew Research Centre (2023), radio is an important news source for rural areas and elderly persons, demonstrating its sustained significance to many consumers. 83

Mobile And Society * Electronic media allows for preservation and on-demand access. Online news archives serve as an easily available library of past events, allowing readers to explore historical material, compare opinions on various issues, and trace the evolution of news articles over time. This makes examining facts easier, gaining a better knowledge of difficult situations, and conducting historical analyses. * Furthermore, electronic media may be an effective instrument for investigative journalism, offering venues for whistle-blowers, exposing injustices, and holding officials responsible. Furthermore, internet databases and transparency projects frequently provide individuals access to government papers and decision-making processes, encouraging public knowledge and civic involvement. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the advantages of Electronic and Digital Media for news production
and distribution.

5.4 SNACKING/ GRAZING ON THE NEWS
Mobile technology can potentially exacerbate the trend toward snacking on the news to the extent that it encourages shorter, dispersed consumption patterns and that mobile news use displaces other forms of news consumption. Mobile technology can worsen the trend of news snacking by encouraging shorter, scattered consumption patterns and replacing traditional modes of news consumption. However, what does 'snacking' or 'grazing' mean in mobile news consumption? The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to people absorbing the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. This behaviour resembles how someone would nibble on modest food throughout the day. Figure 6: Snacking on News (Source: The Noun Project, https://thenounproject. com/ )

Scholars have frequently criticised the public's lack of attention to the news, Mobile News claiming that individuals often 'snack' or 'graze' on it. While this behaviour Consumption Patterns might occur on any platform, it was notably noted in connection to television remote control and channel flipping (Pew et al., 2012), as well as the Internet's multitude of channels and quick-hit Web sites and links (Bucy et al., 2014). The DVRs and mobile phones offer flexible media consumption options, including when, where, and quantity. The Internet and digital media are ideal for news consumption due to their ease, cheap cost, and emphasis on user control. For example, DVRs and mobile phones control when, where, and the amount of media consumed. Others have reiterated the significance of user control, claiming that the Internet and digital media give this as well as convenience and relatively cheap cost, making them particularly well adapted to news snacking. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Define the term snacking/ grazing.

5.5 MOBILE NEWS CONSUMPTION:
PATTERNS, PEOPLE, PLACE AND
PARTICIPATION
Learners, let us move further and learn how mobile news is consumed. Who consumes it? Moreover, how do the audiences participate in the news production process? Figure 7: Consumer News Preference (Source: Created by Hanbai, from The Noun Project, https://thenounproject.com/ ) Let us begin by discussing the 'Patterns' of mobile news consumption. * Starting with the general patterns of mobile news consumption--accessing the news through mobile devices as platforms--several studies show a

Mobile And Society sharp increase after the initial years of smartphone dissemination with touchscreens. For instance, cross-cultural studies carried out in the US and Europe in 2012 and 2013 reveal a notable rise in the consumption of mobile news, which is beginning to encroach on computer-based online news. * Investigations of print, computer, mobile, and tablet usage for individual newspapers in Sweden have indicated both displacing and complementing impacts. In Japan, research concluded that mobile news was complementary to heritage news media. * Furthermore, research from the United States indicates that individuals spend more time getting news overall (Sasseen et al., 2013), whilst research from Portugal indicates that people use mobile news less frequently than internet news. Figure 8: Pattern, People, Place and Participation (Source: https:// iconscout.com/ ) Now, let us get a deeper insight into the 'People' who consume mobile news. * People's varied usage is plausibly one of the reasons for the contradictory results regarding the people mostly involved in mobile news consumption. For example, Swedish research has demonstrated notable variations based on age (Westlund & Fardigh, 2015) and generational affiliation (Westlund & Weibull, 2013). * Studies conducted in the United States with college students have demonstrated a substantial correlation between mobile news consumption and total news media usage patterns (Chan-Olmsted et al., 2013). * Teenagers in Sweden have also shown similar results (Westlund & Bjur,
2013) . Numerous researches have confirmed the significance of age,
gender, and educational attainment in stratification (Westlund & Weibull, 2013; Wolf & Schnauber, 2014). According to a Swedish study, educated males between 15 and 49 are considerably more likely to use mobile news often than other men. It should come as no surprise that most smartphone users are heavy users. * A cross-cultural European study confirmed the significance of age and educational attainment. However, it also revealed that those in jobs and relationships are likelier than singles and homemakers to access mobile 86 news (Fortunati et al., 2014).

Furthermore, let us discuss how mobile news consumption varies with the Mobile News change in 'Place'. Consumption Patterns * One would be surprised to know that studies discovered that mobile media use is widespread when both commuting and at work (Taneja et al., 2012). Also, it was found that mobile news consumption occurs predominantly when on the go and amid daily life (Dimmick et al., 2011). * Recent research indicates that mobile news is widely accessed in many settings, including work and home (Schroder, 2014), with less "context stability" than traditional news sources. This implies that mobile news consumption varies greatly depending on location, time, and other daily activities (Wolf & Schnauber, 2014). * People use mobile devices to obtain news anytime and from any location. Meanwhile, learners, it is worth mentioning that individuals were first apprehensive about using cell phones with touchscreens (Westlund,
2007) . Furthermore, standards are evolving around where and when it
is permissible to use a smartphone, which may influence the locations of use. Finally, let us quickly understand how audiences 'Engage/Participate' in news production; * When one looks at different types of engagement/participation, one may see two distinct research threads. First, there are many studies on the dissolving borders between 'produsage' (Bruns, 2012), a portmanteau of the words 'producer' and 'user'. Much research in journalism studies has focused on how viewers engage (or do not participate) in the news- producing process (Lewis, 2012; Lewis & Westlund, 2015). * However, such research has almost solely focused on computer-based behaviours, with only a few assessments of engagement/participation in news via mobile devices. An exception to this rule is research conducted in China that examined how college students used their mobile devices to read and follow news postings on microblogs like Twitter. The study found that this type of consumption was increasing and that the so-called expectation value of mobile news was a good indicator of this trend (Wei et al., 2013). * According to a different survey, college students prefer to follow the news through friends and connections on their mobile devices rather than consciously and actively looking for news websites. (Mihailidis, 2014). * Many studies have been conducted on the relationship between political engagement and mobile news consumption, which, in a broader sense, is related to democracy, information access, and mobilisation (Liu, 2013). * Also, the use of mobile media for political news correlates with particular political participation measures. Demographics and socio-economic status also play a role in predicting the use of mobile media by various groups of people. (Campbell & Kwak, 2010; Kwak, Campbell, Choi, & Bae, 2011; Lee, Kwak, Campbell, & Ling, 2014).

Mobile And Society Check Your Progress: 5
Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is 'produsage'?

5.6 REUTERS INSTITUTE'S DIGITAL NEWS
REPORT 2023: KEY FINDINGS
Learners, since we are learning about mobile news, we need to get acquainted with the current status of online news consumption. One of the authentic data regarding the same is generated by the Reuters Institute. The Reuters Institute's 2023 Digital News Report reveals major developments in online news consumption trends throughout the globe. The Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism is devoted to investigating the global future of journalism via discussion, involvement, and research. Figure 9: Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2023 (Source: https:// reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/digital-news-report/2023 ) Now, let us have a look at the key highlights of the report: * Firstly, the 2023 Digital News Report indicates the shifting patterns in online news consumption in India. You can understand the pervasiveness of mobile news consumption because Indians are shifting from traditional news websites to search engines and mobile news aggregators (43%)-- online platforms or software devices that compile news stories--as their main sources of online news, per the report. * The report also highlights the lower percentage of newspaper readers in the country. As per the report, only 12% of people prefer to read news from newspapers or other direct sources, whereas 28% prefer to read news on social media. * The Digital News Report 2023 also states how the population of India prefers to consume their news. It reflects that Indians prefer watching or listening to news content over reading it.

* The report found regional differences in online news engagement in a Mobile News global scenario. While Scandinavian nations continue to work closely with Consumption Patterns well-known news organisations, social media is particularly important in Asia, Latin America, and Africa. * Also, preferences for news consumption vary across countries. For example, Finland and the UK have high reading rates (80%). On the other hand, forty per cent (40%) of people in India and Thailand choose to watch the news online. Besides, 52% of Filipinos say they prefer video news.
Impact of COVID-19 on News Consumption
The report also underlines the ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic affected news consumption and preferences. In India, the amount of news read and shared is dropping alarmingly. According to data, access to internet news dropped precipitously by 12% points from 2022 to 2023. Also, television watching has declined by 10%, particularly among younger and urban populations. Moreover, a portion of the decrease in news engagement can be attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic's waning impact once lockdown regulations were loosened in April 2022. * Highlighting the issue of trust in news, the report suggested that between 2021 and 2023, trust in news in India remained stable at 38%, ranking among the lowest in the Asia-Pacific region. In contrast to India, there is more confidence in nations like Finland (69%) and Portugal (58%). However, confidence is also lower in nations with stronger political polarisation, such as Greece (19%), Argentina (30%), Hungary (25%), and the United States (32%). Check Your Progress: 6 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the impact of Covid-19 on news consumption.

5.7 NATIONAL AND GLOBAL CHALLENGES
DUE TO CHANGES IN NEWS
CONSUMPTION PATTERNS
As discussed earlier in this unit, mobile news is a double-edged sword with its share of advantages and disadvantages. The following are some of the issues that both India and the entire world are facing as a result of changes in news consumption patterns: * Misinformation and Fake News 89

Mobile And Society Moving away from conventional news sources and towards search engines and social media may aid in disseminating disinformation and fake news. This can result in widespread misunderstanding, incorrect beliefs and even civil upheaval. Figure 10: Rise of Misinformation and Disinformation (Source: Vector Stock, www.VectorStock.com/35599102 ) * Quality of Journalism Declining interest in traditional news sources may influence the quality of journalism. Independent and reputable journalism may suffer financial difficulties, resulting in decreased investigative reporting and in-depth analysis. * Democracy and Polarisation Using social media as a news source might lead to political polarisation. People may be exposed to biased information, affecting the democratic process. Figure 11: Challenges of Mobile News Consumption (Democracy and Polarization). (Source: Created by Bakhtiar Zein, https://www.istockphoto. com/ ) * Media Trust India's low confidence in the media concerns its democracy. Rebuilding trust in the media is critical to an informed citizenry. * Youth Disconnect Reducing television watching among young people indicates a disconnect with traditional news media. Engaging and enlightening the younger generation through credible news sources is critical to their civic education. * Dependence on Algorithmic Feeds Users who rely on social media and search engines for news are exposed to

content created by algorithms, which might restrict access to important news Mobile News stories and other points of view. Consumption Patterns Check Your Progress: 7 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Enumerate the national and global challenges due to changes in news
consumption patterns.

5.9 FUTURE OF MOBILE NEWS AND ITS
IMPACT
Learners, based on what we have learnt in this unit, what do you think can be the future of mobile news? Is it all just likes and shares, or can it be something more? Well, the truth is that we hold the power to shape the future of mobile news. Moreover, there are difficulties involved. It may be difficult to distinguish fact from fiction, and fake news spreads like wildfire. However, do not be frightened, as we can appropriately navigate this exciting new world. The following can be considered to envision a way further. Let us start by talking about media literacy. Awareness of biases and news sources and recognition of false information are crucial in the present digital age. By developing these critical thinking abilities, one can recognise a dubious narrative at a distance and become resistant to clickbait. Consider it a superpower one can gain in the present. However, we are not alone in this war. 'Collaboration' is essential! Imagine a society where fact-checkers, governmental organisations, and social media companies unite to combat false information. Imagine a battle room humming with activity as people dispel myths and ensure the truth wins. By working together, we can create a more positive online space where knowledge is used for the benefit rather than as a tool for manipulation. Also, India should look at the prospect of passing laws like those in Australia, which require internet platforms to compensate regional media outfits for using their content. Besides guaranteeing content producers receive fair remuneration and inspiring them to produce real and original material, this can assist in bolstering the flagging news sector. Learners, remember that the future of mobile news is subject to change. Our responsibility is to mould it, encourage media literacy, build teamwork, and ensure that excellent journalism is fairly compensated. By doing these things, we may pave the way for a day when mobile news engages and informs us, allows us to participate actively in society, and ultimately aids in creating a better world.

5.10 LET US SUM UP
Learners, let us sum up what we have learned in this unit on Mobile News Consumption. Firstly, we discussed the idea of news for citizens and consumers. In doing so, we differentiated between the two concepts of Citizen and Consumer. While the citizen is a political entity, the consumer is an economic entity guided by market forces. Further, we discussed different theories related to consumer preferences, which shape news content and its consumption. There were four theories we discussed altogether. The theories are the Scarcity Theory of Attention, the Theory of Social Currency, and the Theory of Social Presence. Selective exposure and Uses and Gratification Theory are other related theories that may be applied to understand the preferences of mobile news consumers. We further discussed the impact of consumer preferences on news production. In doing so, we discussed different factors that shape consumer news content. We also discussed the different media available for news production and dissemination. In doing so, we discussed the advantages of print, electronic and digital media. Further, we discussed the concept of snacking/ grazing on the news. The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to people absorbing the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. Further, we discussed the four Ps of mobile news consumption. These are Patterns, People, Place and Participation. We also discussed the key findings of the Digital News Report 2023 of Reuters Institute. This report talks about the patterns of news consumption in India and throughout the world. This report also dealt with the impact of Covid-19 on news consumption. We further discussed the national and global challenges due to changes in news consumption patterns. In doing so, we discussed Misinformation and fake news, Quality of Journalism,
Democracy and Polarization, Media Trust, Youth Disconnect and Dependence
on Algorithmic Feeds. Towards the end, the unit concluded with a discussion on the future of mobile news and its impact on people, society and democracy.
5.11 KEYWORDS
Mobile News Consumption: The consumption of news through the apps provided on mobile phones/ tablets. Snacking/Grazing: The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to the current practice of people absorbing the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. Clickbait: Something (such as a headline) designed to make readers want to click on a hyperlink, especially when the link leads to content of dubious value or interest. The main purpose of content (on the Internet) is to attract attention and encourage visitors to click on a link to a particular web page.

Citizens: Citizens are concerned with the common good and their obligations Mobile News to the state. Through their involvement in democracy, citizens have political Consumption Patterns agency. Consumers: Consumers are primarily motivated by personal demands and market pressures. Their choices give them market-driven agency.
5.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Barnett, S. (1992). New news heralds a new era. British Journalism Review,
3(4), 68-69. https://doi.org/10.1177/095647489200300417
2. Boczkowski, P., Mitchelstein, E., & Matassi, M. (2017). Incidental news:
How young people consume news on social media.
3. Franklin, B. (Ed.). (2007). Local Journalism and Local Media: Making the
Local News (2nd ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203969205
4. Huang, W., & Yan, J. (2012). Effects of visual salience on news attention in
mobile Internet. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 52(3), 90-98.5. Ohme, W., & Yuan, M. F. (2016). Eye-tracking web users' navigation
patterns on different page layouts: An attention scarcity perspective. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 88, 87-100
6. Mitchell, A., Rosenstiel, T., & Christian, L. (2012). Mobile devices and
news consumption: Some good signs for journalism. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center.
7. Molyneux, L. (2017). Mobile News Consumption: A habit of snacking.
Digital Journalism. 6.1-17.10.1080/21670811.2017.1334567.8. Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Eddy, K., Robertson, C. T., & Nielsen, R. K.
(2023). Digital News Report 2023, Reuters Institute. United Kingdom. Retrieved from https://policycommons.net/artifacts/4164711/digital_ news_report_2023/4973510/ CID: 20.500.12592/3sq026.9. Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kaloga, S., & Levy, M. (2015). Trends in social
and psychological factors in the consumption of news and public affairs content. Digital News Project.
10. Porter, E, 'Consumers and Citizens', The Consumer Citizen (New York,
2021; online edn, Oxford Academic, 17 Dec. 2020), https://doi.org/10.1093/ oso/9780197526781.003.0006
11. Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of
telecommunications, Wiley. ISBN: 0471015814.12. Salomon, G. (2008). No media is an island: Intermedia interdependency and
transfer learning. In I. Spector, M. C. Linn, & R. S. Clark (Eds.), Handbook of research on educational communication and technology (3rd ed., pp. 157-177). Routledge
13. Westlund, O. (2015). News consumption in an age of mobile media:
Patterns, people, place, and participation. Mobile Media & Communication.
3.10.1177/2050157914563369.

Mobile And Society * Wojciesiak, M., & Wen, J. (2018). News avoidance on digital news platforms: Effects of perceived bias and trust on news avoidance among young adults. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 95(1), 126- 142. * Wolf, C., & Schnauber, A. (2015). News consumption in the mobile era: The role of mobile devices and traditional journalism's content within the user's information repertoire. Digital Journalism, 3(5), 759-776.5. 13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Consumers are primarily motivated by personal demands and market
pressures, whereas citizens are concerned with the common good and their obligations to the state. While customers have market-driven agency through their choices, citizens have political agency through their involvement in democracy. Citizens, as news consumers, view information with a civic mindset, aiming to keep informed in order to participate actively in democratic processes. Their motives stem from a duty to contribute significantly to society, encouraging civic participation through voting and community involvement. In contrast, news consumers view information as a commodity, motivated by personal preferences or entertainment value. This thinking might result in more passive news consumption, giving sensationalism or validating pre-existing opinions precedence over civic duties. Citizens and consumers differ in how they produce news, with citizens contributing to public debate through community reporting, participatory journalism, and educated conversations. On the other hand, consumers indirectly shape news agendas through market- driven preferences based on entertainment value rather than public service. Citizens are required to assess sources and actively fact-check. Check Your Progress: 2
1. According to the social currency theory's fundamental tenets, users
appreciate material they can debate and share with others in their social networks, elevating their status and creating virtual communities. This inclination is a boon for platforms that profit from user-generated content and viral trends. Not only is information consumed in the flurry of mobile news consumption, but it is also shared, exchanged, and turned into social currency. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Broadcast media allows immediate access to breaking news and live
events, frequently reaching greater audiences simultaneously than internet channels. This is especially important in fast-changing events like natural catastrophes or major breaking news. Studies have shown that television remains the preferred news source during important events, proving its capacity to swiftly cut through the noise and reach huge audiences. 94 (Wojciesiak & Wen, 2018; Newman et al., 2015)

* Multimedia learning can boost knowledge retention and engagement, Mobile News underlining the benefits of broadcast media in presenting news effectively Consumption Patterns (Salomon, 2008). * Broadcast media can reach those with limited technology or live in places with inadequate internet access. This guarantees that everyone has the chance to keep informed, regardless of socio-economic status or technology literacy. According to the Pew Research Centre (2023), radio is an important news source for rural areas and elderly persons, demonstrating its sustained significance to many consumers. * Electronic media allows for preservation and on-demand access. Online news archives serve as an easily available library of past events, allowing readers to explore historical material, compare opinions on various issues, and trace the evolution of news articles over time. This makes examining facts easier, gaining a better knowledge of difficult situations, and conducting historical analyses. * Furthermore, electronic media may be an effective instrument for investigative journalism, offering venues for whistle-blowers, exposing injustices, and holding officials responsible. Furthermore, internet databases and transparency projects frequently provide individuals access to government papers and decision-making processes, encouraging public knowledge and civic involvement. Check Your Progress: 4
1. The term 'snacking' or 'grazing' on the news refers to people absorbing
the news in tiny, fragmented, and frequently bite-sized chunks. Rather than reading lengthy news pieces, consumers choose to peruse headlines, read shorter articles, or watch short video segments on digital platforms and social media. This behaviour resembles how someone would nibble on modest food throughout the day. Check Your Progress: 5
1. It is a portmanteau of the words 'producer' and 'user'.
Check Your Progress: 6
1. According to data, access to internet news dropped precipitously by 12%
in India from 2022 to 2023. Also, television watching has declined by 10%, particularly among younger and urban populations. Moreover, some of the decrease in news engagement can be attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic's waning impact once lockdown regulations were loosened in April 2022. Check Your Progress: 7
1. * Misinformation and Fake News
* Quality of Journalism * Democracy and Polarisation * Media Trust * Youth Disconnect * Dependence on Algorithmic Feeds

BLOCK 2
UNDERSTANDING
MOJO

BLOCK 2 INTRODUCTION:
UNDERSTANDING MOJO
In the previous Block, you were exposed to the communication angle of a mobile medium. Let's change the focus to using this handheld device as professional equipment to create meaningful and impactful news stories. Mojo or Mobile Journalism is economically viable for media institutions and individual users. You may not be a mere news consumer anymore; rather, you will enjoy being a news producer. That's the metamorphosis in which you will take a new role as a Prosumer. Though the concept of prosumer was floated many decades ago by Alvin Toffler (1980), however in real life, you will understand its meaning. This Block will take you through the basics of Mojo.
Unit 6: Landscape of Mobile Journalism, In today's ever-connected
world, smartphones have transformed from mere communication tools into indispensable assets for journalism. This Unit explores the multifaceted realm of mobile journalism, examining its structure and profound impact on news dissemination. As smartphones blur the boundaries between news consumers and creators, understanding the symbiotic relationship between users and their devices becomes paramount. From traditional news gathering to the rise of citizen journalism, this Unit navigates through the diverse landscapes of mobile journalism, illuminating emerging technologies, social media integration, and the evolving ecosystem of news production, thereby equipping students with the essential skills and insights to thrive in this dynamic field.
Unit 7: Mobile Multimedia Basics, In the digital age, the ubiquity of
smartphones and tablets has propelled mobile multimedia into the forefront of our daily lives, enabling seamless access to and creation of multimedia content anytime, anywhere. This Unit explores the multifaceted realm of mobile multimedia, including its fundamental components, applications, dynamics, architecture, and design. We will examine the intricate concepts of audio and video and the algorithms underpinning mobile multimedia. Additionally, we'll unravel the significance of graphics, image data analytics, and the role of colour in enhancing user experiences. Furthermore, this module will elucidate the symbiotic relationship between multimedia and cloud computing, culminating in a comprehensive understanding of how mobile multimedia reshapes communication, consumption, and creation paradigms in the digital landscape.
Unit 8: Introduction to Mobile Application, In the digital era, the prominence
of mobile devices as gateways to the Internet has spurred a revolution in how we interact with technology. This Unit serves as an exploration into the realm of mobile applications, addressing their evolution, structure, and impact on various domains. You will understand the considerations and challenges unique to mobile app development, comparing them with PC and web-based applications to discern their distinctive features. By tracing the evolutionary path of mobile-based apps and analysing emerging trends in the mobility space, you will understand the role of mobile applications in shaping user experiences and driving innovation across industries.

Unit 9: Apps for MoJo, delves into the transformative role of mobile technology
in journalism, exemplifying the shift towards Mobile Journalism (MoJo). From the conventional tools of DSLR cameras to the ubiquitous smartphone, journalists now wield a multitude of apps for capturing, editing, and disseminating news content. By exploring various app categories, including recording, editing, live streaming, social media, and augmented reality, students understand the diverse tools available for modern storytelling. This Unit not only equips students with practical skills in mobile journalism but also underscores the evolving nature of news production in the digital age.
Unit 10: Mobile Journalism Equipment, Mobile journalism, or Mojo, has
transformed news production by enabling journalists to create and share content swiftly using smartphones. This Unit explores the essential tools and techniques for effective Mojo practice, emphasising the shift from traditional bulky camera setups to lightweight mobile solutions. As we explore mobile devices, editing applications, live streaming, and advanced equipment, we aim to equip you with the skills needed to excel in the dynamic field of mobile journalism, where innovation and adaptability are paramount. Sometime back, scholars of digital media observed that the Internet is dead; probably, with the advent of Apps, it might be true in the sense that there are more customised ways of accessing and using online content through mobile Apps.

UNIT 6 LANDSCAPE OF MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Structure
6.0 Introduction
6.1 Learning Outcomes
6.2 Journalism and Social Media
6.2.1 Web 2.0 As A Communication Strategy
6.3 What Is Mobile Journalism?
6.3.1 Traditional and Virtual News Gathering
6.4 Citizen Journalism: A Complete Diversity
6.5 Mobile Journalism Landscapes
6.6 Mobile Ecosystem
6.7 Analytics Behind Mobile Journalism
6.8 Social Networks for Journalistic Practices
6.9 Emerging Technologies in Mobile Journalism
6.10 Let Us Sum Up
6.11 Key Words
6.12 Further Readings
6.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
6.0 INTRODUCTION
Smartphones are everywhere--literally. Everyone owns a smartphone, from an ordinary person to someone with professional expertise. Owning a smartphone is not only an icon of luxury. Instead, it empowers them with confidence. A kind of confidence that they can express their opinions, be a voice for the voiceless, and so on. Thus, a symbiotic relationship develops between the user and the smartphone. This relationship is used for the right cause by spreading accurate and authentic information. However, it has shifted the paradigm in how we develop and consume information, particularly the type we call news. They are introducing the framework behind creating user-generated content (UGC), empowering citizens with digital skills that transform their alternative voice into a more mainstream form. Smartphones for a Journalist are like a portable newsroom. In the millennial era, there can be several occasions where breaking news has been flashed via a smartphone. Mobile Journalism helps tech-savvy reporters and citizens with a nose for news bridge their digital divide.

6.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to: * Understand how mobile devices, social media platforms and apps are interlinked; * Making journalistic content more engaging and interactive; * Techniques behind producing news for social and interactive media; * Nuances on how successful news publishers have developed mobile and social media strategies; and * Learning key skills to launch and develop news websites, apps and social media outputs.
6.2 JOURNALISM AND SOCIAL MEDIA
As we all know, Journalism is the "activity of gathering, assessing, creating, and presenting news and information to a large diversified audience". Journalism has taken a new shape in this technological world because of the advent of the Internet and Social Media. So, what do the Internet and Social Media do to Journalism? The arrival of the Internet has profoundly transformed the landscape of journalism in numerous ways, revolutionising how news is produced, distributed, and consumed. For example, the Internet and Social media help in the immediate dissemination of news to a global audience, empowering individuals to become citizen journalists, eliminating the constraints of traditional media schedules, and enhancing storytelling by providing a richer and more immersive experience for the audience. About journalism, Social media facilitates reach, immediacy, and interactivity among varied users to gather information, connect with audiences, and disseminate news stories. Journalists use social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and others to report breaking news and events in real time in addition to the conventional radio, print, and broadcast news platforms. Social media journalism differs in its presentation ability from traditional means, as social media news is not just letters, words, and photos. Instead, it's amalgamated with visuals of choice mixed with varied typography and colours. This presentation has the innate ability to acquire the audience's attention perspective.
6.2.1 Web 2.0 as a Communication Strategy
Web 2.0 refers to the second generation of the World Wide Web. Web 2.0 offers a communication strategy within the Internet, heading from a static, one-way communication model to a more dynamic and interactive approach. Convergence is the key aspect of Web 2.0, with social media platforms being the key element. Web 2.0 encourages users to create and share content. These platforms often support various media formats by combining text, images, videos, and links in a single, integrated experience. Web 2.0 emphasises interactivity, enabling users to participate in discussions, provide feedback, and engage with content 102 in real-time.

With the broadening of Web 2.0, many users believe that social media is just Landscape of Mobile the connection platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram. Instead, it Journalism also includes collaborative projects, blogs, microblogs, content communities, virtual game worlds and virtual social worlds. As wide as the social media sphere, journalism exists on all platforms, with form, content, and presentation differences. Following are the key aspects of Journalism in the world of social media: * Dissemination of News: Social media, the Internet, and the era of technology & applications have become important gateways of news consumption and have profoundly given a new meaning to 'journalism'. The predominant characteristics of new media, like Interactivity, Digital, Hyperactivity, Simulation, etc., have given a new perspective to journalism with the main ideology of exchanging views and information. With the emphasis shifted from research and content to production and form, keeping in mind redefined authorship as audiences became partners in news making and presentation. * Citizen Journalism: Social media equips and builds up ordinary individuals to act as citizen journalists, reporting on events as they happen. Thus, it provides unique perspectives and contributes to a more diverse news landscape, dominating the news space on social media platforms. This attribute explains a tectonic shift in the dynamics of journalism by bringing about user-generated content (UGC) and the 'digital first' race, which indeed has a compulsion on reporters and journalists to be multi-skilled in using varied facets of technology and social media to their advantage at a broader pace. * Monetisation and Sustainability: Social media platforms offer opportunities for news organisations to provide news and information and aid them in monetising content through advertising, sponsored posts, and subscriptions. Using social media for advertising and revenue can create challenges for traditional business models, and there are concerns about the impact on the quality of journalism when driven by clicks and engagement metrics. * Accuracy and Fact-Checking: Accuracy and fact-checking are essential principles in journalism as they contribute to the credibility and trustworthiness of the news reported. With information overload, users tend to get misinformed and uninformed about information and facts. Therefore, it becomes necessary to fact-check information for its accuracy and authenticity. Social media is valuable for journalists to verify information and fact-check stories. Humans have the innate ability to communicate and socialise, and journalism through social media has increased the aspect of socialisation among journalists, who increasingly use this mode for developing professional contacts, beat reporting, and looking for new and unique stories. In modern newsrooms, social media is one of the decisive factors when choosing which information and news needs to be covered based on social media popularity and mass opinion.

Understanding Mojo It is worth noting that journalism through social media can be referred to as the "Fifth Estate of Democracy", which has surpassed immediacy, responsiveness, sharing information that is accurate and authentic, helpful in catching the social evil and serving justice with equality. With enormous advantages, limitations include social media journalism as propaganda, misinformation, fake news and deceit. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. State the parameters for journalism through social media.

2. Discuss the importance of essential principles behind journalism through
social media.

6.3 WHAT IS MOBILE JOURNALISM?
Mobile Journalism is the technological upliftment of information dissemination with the aid of technology, especially smartphones, the Internet and social media. Mobile journalism, commonly called " MoJo" (mobile journalism), is a form of journalism where journalists use mobile devices and technology for news gathering, content development and production. Mobile Journalism can also be called "on-the-moment Journalism". Using mobile technology for journalism is on trend now as it has easy production with state-of-the-art technological facilities. Mobile journalism has become an integral and inevitable part of the modern news landscape, enabling journalists to report quickly, efficiently, and in a multimedia-rich format with appropriate visuals to reach audiences of all levels. Thus, MoJo facilitates real-time content transmission from the field to newsrooms and audiences worldwide. In this techno-social world, nothing is possible without a smartphone; days without accessing social media are never in millennial history. A symbiotic relationship exists between communication and mobile technology, reflecting co-dependency with benefits. Through mobile journalism, it is easy to persuade people with wireless mobile computing, where everyday life demands and social interactions are mediated, thus being "a voice for the voiceless". Media scholar Sherry Turkle (2008) calls these mobile devices as virtual leashes that constrain and control us whereby "we are tethered to our 'always on/always on us' communication devices and the people and things we reach through them" (2008, 2)--thus fuelling creativity in news outlets for easy dissemination of information. Mobile Journalism is an 'add-on' to conventional journalism,

which enables social media users to create global online communities to share Landscape of Mobile information, facilitate relationship building, and democratise news content Journalism (Fig. 6.1). Fig. 6.1 Diagram showing mobile journalism content planning By Jools Oughtibridge / joolsoughtibridge.co.uk
6.3.1 Traditional and Virtual News Gathering
Traditional news-gathering events, like Electronic News Gathering (ENG) and Electronic Field Production (EFP), need the physical presence of crews, cameras & equipment on location. In contrast, virtual news gathering through MoJo needs a multi-skilled journalist who is well-versed in technological advancements with wide-spectrum Internet. MoJo is perhaps most associated with journalism video production. The journalist is popularly called a 'jack-of-all-trades' skilled in the once-distinct filming, sound recording and lighting techniques. MoJo can happen anywhere. Any reporter in the field can capture video footage, conduct interviews, and report on events virtually from any location. The footage can be edited and transmitted in real-time in the same location and shared with the newsroom or audience. Drones equipped with cameras can help capture aerial footage of locations and events, picture unique perspectives, and enhance the art of visual storytelling. Even if the reporter cannot reach the location due to some unavoidable disturbances, there are possibilities of remote coverage and remote interviewing through platforms like Zoom, Skype, or others, which allow real-time communication. Mobile journalism, in collaboration with Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), can help journalists and reporters create immersive virtual environments for news reporting. This technological advancement aids in 105

Understanding Mojo presenting stories in 3D or providing virtual tours of locations, which can transport audiences to remote or inaccessible locations. Mobile journalism encourages participatory journalism as traditional media does not monopolise news. Mobile journalists articulate their role within the broader journalistic field. According to the Pew Research Center's 2023 State of the News Media, nine in ten adults (93%) get at least some news online (either via mobile or desktop), and the online space has become a host for the digital homes of both legacy news outlets and new, "born on the web" news outlets (https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/fact-sheet/digital-news/) Mobile journalism is more accessible and cost-effective than traditional broadcast equipment. As it requires less specialised equipment, many journalists and news organisations find it easier to adopt mobile journalism. With a wide spectrum of advantages, MoJo also poses challenges, such as potential limitations in output quality, both audio and video, compared to professional output. Journalists must be multi-skilled, adapt to new workflows and ensure the security and integrity of their mobile reporting. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Elaborate on the state-of-the-art technological facilities behind mobile
technology.

2. Traditional News Gathering and Virtual News Gathering-Differentiate.

6.4 CITIZEN JOURNALISM: A COMPLETE
DIVERSITY
Mobile journalism is a specific form involving mobile devices, such as smartphones, tablets, etc., to capture, edit, and share news content. It involves professional and non-professional journalists using this platform as their primary reporting tool and technique. Citizen journalism refers to the general public's collection, dissemination, and analysis of news and information, often using online platforms and social media. It involves ordinary people sharing news as one of their responsibilities. Citizen journalism is a participatory medium, along with social media journalism, in which any user or individual can produce and disseminate information based on their personal belief or a story of his neighbourhood. This particular form of

journalism is facilitated by social media, in which the latter is an active voice Landscape of Mobile to the people. The public is now open to assessing and evaluating the news Journalism and adding more information to it or giving a different perspective to the same news. The predominant advantage of citizen journalism is being a voice for the underprivileged and the local communities and actively participating in the process of decision-making that brings out political and economic reforms. Like Mobile journalism, Citizen journalism has changed and morphed society and remains one of the vital parts of modern civil society. Citizen journalism gives each human being a chance to play an active role in society by being a voice for the voiceless across regions and communities. In today's age of technological advancements and digital disruption, the role of citizen journalism is indeed a crucial and more challenging one. Anyone looking forward to being a citizen journalist must follow the developments of events and happenings as they occur, or they can produce the news themselves. Furthermore, citizen journalism contributes to the variety and pluralism across media outlets. Generally, "laymen" citizens will not even think of journalism in times of crisis and share information. However, some citizens set themselves apart from the crowd by being involved with first-person reportage. They commonly use their mobile phones to capture a photo of the event, add information, create a video with appropriate visuals, and post a tweet or a caption describing their surroundings and experiences to inform and connect with other people. Citizens are always armed with smartphones for friendly connections and watching, capturing and sharing breaking news. These citizens are laymen and not journalists. However, they have a nose for news and can create news stories and share them online. In September 2013, there was widespread video footage of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, which gained instant global attention. Videos of people suffering from the weapons in Ghouta, Syria, were posted on YouTube and shared on social media, quickly garnering attention from viewers around the world and the mainstream media. Citizen journalism became universally accessible with enormous blogs and through social media platforms. Blogs are personal web pages where individuals communicate with a widespread audience through texts and other multimedia like audio, video and pictures. Blogs can also be journalism tools for sharing information, opinions, feelings, and other content. Twitter is a microblogging platform that allows people to share information in a real-time news feed by posting brief comments about their experiences and thoughts.
6.5 MOBILE JOURNALISM LANDSCAPES
With technological advancements, users depend on the World Wide Web (WWW) and the Internet for everything. Owing to this usage, there is a heightened website traffic, double last year's. Heightened web traffic needs devices with upgraded and more innovative technologies, with an ascending graph in ownership pacing reaching millions and billions. This mobile revolution has an enormous effect on the public and masses, giving unprecedented opportunities to develop closer customer relationships, particularly with those living in marginalised communities, to create and publish their voice on a global scale.

Understanding Mojo Digital platforms have changed how news is consumed, distributed and produced. Journalism has multiple roles: it monitors and curbs power, supports and creates public debate, and educates and entertains. News holds lots of goodness of public good serving a purpose beyond the immediate needs of advertisers and consumers, with monetisation through cross-subsidy in the form of advertising or, in some cases, government support. News producers make their content available to search engines and social media with little or no financial return. And to satisfy the workings of digital platforms, news producers create more dynamic and shareable content. 'The chief purpose of the "news" is to enable humanity to live successfully toward the future. In the digital platform era, journalism and news media have come under intense scrutiny. With the advent of digital platforms--including the invention of Google in 1998, Facebook in 2004, and Twitter in 2006--questions about the role and value of the news loom large. Thus, digital platforms have changed the news, and thus, the news landscape has shifted from normalcy. In digital journalism, news no longer originates just from a few mainstream media brands but comes from many small news sites and blogs. This makes for a noisy environment where we are constantly bombarded by information. To the same extent, definitions of news are becoming extremely broad, with extensive scope for the 'softest' of content. News media, when evaluated through the prism of technology, includes algorithms that cause a revolution in digitisation and digital platforms. Today's news consumer looks forward to news with the following capacities: * Citizens consuming more news more often * The biggest change in consumption is the switch to online. These capacities make news consumption interactive, enabling consumers to share, comment, and create content. One study reveals that incidental exposure to news is stronger on YouTube and Twitter than on Facebook, and concerns have been raised around the passive nature of such news consumption. Further, WhatsApp users are more than three times more likely to spread a particular news topic than Facebook users. Simply put, news consumption varies significantly from platform to platform, as does the mobile landscape. However, some users are not active and interactive, but the news finds them simply because of their flexibility. This access and convenience are a boon for news consumers, particularly since so much news content is 'free'. Mobile innovations also play a major role in determining the mobile journalism landscape, with iOS and Android dominating the market. * Apple is the maker of the iPhone (smartphone) and iPad (tablet computer), which run the iOS operating system. * Google started life as a website search engine. However, its mobile operating system, Android, interests us the most. * Facebook is by far the most important social media site for journalists.

It also owns the photo and video site Instagram and the messaging apps Landscape of Mobile
WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger. Journalism
* Amazon is not a smartphone player, but it has succeeded with Kindle Fire tablets and the Amazon Echo, which features the voice command system, Alexa. These tech giants dominate the lives of users with their dynamic and lively landscapes, which can allow users to create multimedia interactive journalism content for display on many of these devices and platforms. A plethora of mobile apps and tools have emerged to support mobile journalism. These include camera apps, video editing apps, audio recording tools, and social media apps for direct distribution. Apps like FiLMiC Pro, LumaFusion, and Adobe Premiere Rush are popular choices for mobile journalists. Again, compared to mobile behaviour on consumer devices, there arises a variegated sequence with smartphones always on the go, PCs during work hours, and tablets in Prime Time. The vertical video revolution has made some news outlets embrace a mobile-first approach, tailoring their content for consumption on mobile devices. This includes creating vertically oriented videos optimised for mobile viewing and interactive storytelling formats that cater to mobile audiences. The landscaping of mobile journalism always looks forward to encouraging innovation in storytelling techniques. Journalists experiment with new formats, such as 360-degree videos, augmented reality, and virtual reality, to enhance the audience's experience.
6.6 MOBILE ECOSYSTEM
The ecosystem of mobile journalism refers to the interconnected and dynamic elements that contribute to the practice and development of journalism using mobile devices. This ecosystem encompasses various components, including tools, platforms, skills, training, and the broader context in which mobile journalism operates. Smartphones and tablets are the primary tools in mobile journalism. These devices come equipped with high-quality cameras, audio recording capabilities, and a range of apps that support journalists in capturing, editing, and sharing news content. Social media plays a central role in the distribution of mobile journalism content. Platforms like Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, and YouTube allow journalists to share news updates, engage with audiences, and broadcast live events. Platforms that support live streaming, such as Facebook Live, YouTube Live, and Periscope, enable journalists to broadcast news events in real time, fostering immediacy and audience engagement. The ecosystem includes contributions from citizen journalists and the broader public who use mobile devices to capture and share news-related content. User- generated content adds diverse perspectives to news coverage. Traditional news organisations, as well as digital-first outlets, play a role in the mobile journalism ecosystem. Some outlets adopt a mobile-first approach, tailoring content for consumption on mobile devices.

Understanding Mojo Efficient Ecosystems also rely on the ability to report from virtually anywhere with a mobile signal, which contributes to the global nature of mobile journalism. Journalists can provide coverage in real-time from the field, reaching a wide audience. A culture of innovation and experimentation also marks mobile ecosystems. Journalists explore new formats, technologies, and storytelling techniques, such as augmented reality, virtual reality, and 360-degree videos. The ecosystem includes considerations of journalistic ethics in the context of mobile reporting. This involves navigating issues related to accuracy, privacy, and responsible use of mobile technology. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write notes on Citizen journalism and its importance in the present scenario

2. Discuss about the mobile ecosystem.

6.7 ANALYTICS BEHIND MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Analytics is interpreting data to gain insights, which helps make data- driven decisions. Leveraging metrics and analytics is important to sustain competitiveness in the data-driven market. What is Analytics? What are Metrics? As more people consume news and information on their mobile devices, journalists and news organisations evaluate analytics to understand better how their audience interacts with content. Mobile analytics in journalism refers to using data and insights from mobile devices to inform editorial decisions, understand audience behaviour, and optimise content delivery. Metrics are quantitative indicators that will judge your presence and performance on social media. Metrics involve certain parameters, like reach (how many people see your content), engagement (how many people interact with your content), traffic (how many people visit your website or other platforms from your social media posts), conversions (how many people take a desired action), and reputation (how people perceive your brand). Various tools and platforms can be used to collect and analyse these metrics, like Google Analytics, Facebook Insights, Twitter Analytics, Instagram Insights, or Hootsuite.

Analytics involves tracking, reviewing, and reporting data to measure web Landscape of Mobile activity and performance, as well as background study of the website and its Journalism components, like webpages, images, and videos. The data collected through web analytics may include SEO, traffic sources, referring sites, page views, paths taken and conversion rates. Apart from this, several other aspects determine the mobile analytics in journalism: * User Engagement Analysis: This analysis involves tracking parameters, including page views, time spent on articles, and the number of shares on mobile platforms. Judging user engagement allows journalists to design audience-centred conceptual content. * Platform-Specific Analytics: These analytics mostly deal with user behaviour, which helps collect platform-specific data and tailor content for each platform. Owing to this, the technological app interface on various mobile platforms like iOS and Android has changed. Along with operating systems, the impact of various mobile devices and screen sizes differs based on user experience. * Audience Analytics involves evaluating the mobile audience based on demographics, location, and other relevant factors. This helps the creator customise content better to suit the preferences and needs of different audience segments. * Mobile Content Analytics: Analysing data to identify high-performing content on mobile devices can guide editorial decisions on the types of stories to focus on. Including visual content and different multimedia elements (images, videos) helps in mobile engagement. * Performance Analytics: Monitoring the performance of mobile apps and websites is much needed for better web page performance. It identifies and addresses issues like slow loading times, mobile-friendly designs and multimedia layouts for better readability on smaller screens. That may affect the user experience. * Notifications and Alerts Analytics: Tracking the effectiveness of push notifications and alerts amidst web traffic is essential for heightened user experience. This analysis also includes responding to breaking news notifications and adjusting strategies accordingly. It helps to understand the impact of social shares on mobile traffic and optimise content for sharing on popular mobile-friendly social media platforms. * Monetisation Analytics: Analysing monetisation to understand the effectiveness of advertising and monetisation strategies on mobile platforms helps optimise ad placements and formats for better user engagement. "Buzzfeed Journalism" or "clickbait journalism," often referred to as "buzzworthy content", focuses on creating attention-grabbing, shareable, and often sensational content designed to generate high levels of engagement, clicks, and social media shares. Buzzworthy journalism often prioritises virality over traditional journalistic values, aiming to quickly capture the audience's attention. Analysing this content can help effectively drive traffic and web and audience engagement. Buzzworthy journalism includes:

Understanding Mojo * Create attention-grabbing headlines that are concept-oriented, exaggerated, or provocative and designed to attract curiosity and encourage clicks. * Listicles, an amalgamation of 'List' and 'Article', are a popular content format across social media platforms that displays information in a list- based structure accompanied by engaging visuals and abridged content. * Countdowns, otherwise referred to as Countdown timers, help social media users engage effectively. They invoke desire and prompt them to take action. Countdown timers in social media posts or ads generate excitement about upcoming news breakouts, promotions, etc. * Clickbait or eye-catching thumbnails or images entice users to click on the content; these thumbnails can misinform and disinform citizens and are sometimes misleading, creating fake content. * Buzzworthy journalism often includes interactive elements like quizzes or polls to encourage user participation and sharing. * Emotionally charged content acts as icons of attraction and is crafted to evoke strong emotions, whether positive (awe, joy) or negative (outrage, shock), as emotionally charged content tends to be more shareable on social media platforms, with prominent share buttons and social media- friendly formats. * Buzzworthy content frequently centres around celebrities, pop culture, and trending topics to capitalise on existing interests. Content tends to be concise and easily digestible, catering to short attention spans prevalent in social media audiences. * Buzzfeed journalism often participates in or creates viral challenges and trends to stay relevant and engage with a wider audience. * Encouraging user participation by soliciting comments, opinions, or submissions can enhance engagement and extend the reach of the content. * Quick response to emerging trends, memes, and online phenomena helps keep the content timely and in tune with the latest internet culture. * Controversial topics or click-worthy debates are highlighted to attract attention and spark user discussions. Journalists need to adapt to social media's changing landscape while maintaining ethical standards and ensuring the accuracy of information. Each social network serves a unique purpose, and journalists often use a combination of these platforms to connect with their audience and share impactful stories.
6.8 SOCIAL NETWORKS FOR JOURNALISTIC
PRACTICES
Social networks play a crucial role in modern journalistic practices, offering journalists new avenues for information gathering, audience engagement, and content distribution. Here are some prominent social networks that journalists often utilise: * Twitter: A microblogging platform widely used for real-time news

updates, Twitter is valuable for breaking news and staying updated on Landscape of Mobile current events. Most journalists use Twitter to share content, engage with Journalism followers, and follow influential industry figures. * Facebook: Facebook serves as a platform for distributing long-form content, building a community around a news outlet, and reaching a diverse audience. Groups and Pages on Facebook can help journalists connect with specific communities and share content tailored to their interests. * LinkedIn: Journalists use LinkedIn to connect with sources, experts, and other professionals and value its networking capabilities. It's a platform for sharing in-depth analyses and opinion pieces and building a professional online presence. * Instagram: A social media platform that initially started as influential, Instagram has developed to be an ideal platform for visual storytelling. Journalists use Instagram to share behind-the-scenes content, photo essays, and engaging visuals. IGTV and Stories offer additional formats for sharing news content in a visually appealing manner. * YouTube: Journalists use YouTube to share video content, including documentaries, interviews, and news reports. Live streaming on YouTube allows for real-time engagement with the audience during events or breaking news situations. * Reddit: Reddit is a platform for community-driven discussions. Journalists use it to discover niche communities related to specific topics and engage with knowledgeable individuals. It's a valuable resource for finding unique perspectives and stories. * WhatsApp: Journalists use WhatsApp to connect with sources, gather information, and communicate with audiences. WhatsApp groups can be formed to create a community interested in specific topics. * Signal: For secure communication, Signal is a preferred messaging app among journalists who deal with sensitive information and protect sources. Its emphasis on privacy makes it suitable for confidential conversations. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write notes on Mobile Analytics in Journalism

2. Discuss clickbait and its need in fact-checking.

6.9 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Emerging technologies continue to shape the landscape of mobile journalism, providing journalists with new tools and capabilities. As technology advances, mobile journalism is expected to benefit from innovations that empower journalists to create compelling and timely content with increased efficiency and accessibility. * 5G Technology: 5G networks enhance mobile connectivity, allowing journalists to upload and stream high-quality content more efficiently. Faster data speeds facilitate real-time reporting, live streaming, and high- definition video transmission. * Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR): AR and VR technologies enable immersive storytelling experiences through mobile devices. Journalists can use AR to overlay information onto the real world, enhancing the audience's understanding of a story. VR allows for 360-degree video reporting, bringing viewers directly into the news environment. * Artificial Intelligence: Artificial Intelligence is integrated into mobile journalism for news reading, content creation, and content development. Transcription services, language translation, voice recognition, etc. Automated video editing tools powered by AI can assist journalists in producing content with specifications. * Blockchain Technology: Blockchain technology is being explored to verify the authenticity of mobile-generated content, which helps reduce piracy, increase transparency, connect artists directly with fans, and verify the scarcity of digital collectables.
6.10 LET US SUM UP
Let us sum up the major points we discussed is this unit: * Smartphones are everywhere--literally. In the millennial era, breaking news can be flashed via a smartphone on several occasions. * Mobile Journalism helps tech-savvy reporters and citizens with a nose for news bridge their digital divide. * The arrival of the Internet has profoundly transformed the landscape of journalism in numerous ways, revolutionising how news is produced, distributed, and consumed. * Mobile journalism, in collaboration with Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), can help journalists and reporters create immersive virtual environments for news reporting. * Citizen journalism is a participatory medium, along with social media journalism, in which any user or individual can produce and disseminate information based on their personal belief or a story of his neighbourhood.

* In digital journalism, news no longer originates just from a few Landscape of Mobile mainstream media brands but comes from many small news sites and Journalism blogs. * The ecosystem of mobile journalism refers to the interconnected and dynamic elements that contribute to the practice and development of journalism using mobile devices. * Analytics is interpreting data to gain insights, which helps make data- driven decisions. Leveraging metrics and analytics is important to sustain competitiveness in the data-driven market. * Emerging technologies continue to shape the landscape of mobile journalism, providing journalists with new tools and capabilities.
6.11 KEYWORDS
User-generated content (UGC) refers to any content--whether text, images, videos, or other forms--created and contributed by non-professional users. Augmented reality (AR): Augmented Reality (AR) is a technology that superimposes computer-generated information, such as images, sounds, or other data, onto a user's real-world view. Virtual reality (VR): Virtual Reality (VR) is a computer-generated simulation of a three-dimensional environment that can be interacted by creating a sense of presence in the virtual space Drone Camera: A drone camera is integrated into a drone, allowing the unmanned aerial vehicle to capture photos and videos from various altitudes and angles. Artificial Intelligence: Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the simulation of human intelligence in machines programmed to think, learn, and perform tasks that typically require human intelligence. Blockchain Technology: Blockchain technology is a decentralised and distributed ledger system that enables secure and transparent record-keeping of transactions across a network of computers.
6.12 FURTHER READINGS
1. Hill, S., & Bradshaw, P. (2018). Mobile-First Journalism: Producing
News for Social and Interactive Media (1st ed.). Routledge.
2. Kuyucu, M. (2020). Social Media and Journalism. In book: Academic
Studies In Social Science (ed) Hasan Babacan & Meric Erarslan &
Abidin Temizer. Montenegro: IVP
3. Wilding, D., Fray, P., Molitorisz, S. & McKewon, E. (2018). The impact
of digital platforms on news and journalistic content. University of Technology Sydney, NSW.

6.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Parameters for journalism through social media include reach, immediacy,
and interactivity among varied users to gather information, connect with audiences, and disseminate news stories.
2. Accuracy and fact-checking are essential principles in journalism,
contributing to the credibility and trustworthiness of the news reported. With information overload, users tend to become misinformed and disinformed about information and facts. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The state-of-the-art technological facilities behind mobile technology
include AR, VR and Drone Journalism.
2. Traditional news-gathering events, like Electronic News Gathering (ENG)
and Electronic Field Production (EFP), require a multi-skilled journalist, whereas virtual news gathering through MoJo requires a journalist. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Citizen journalism is a participatory medium, along with social media
journalism, in which any user or individual can produce and disseminate information based on their personal belief or a story of his neighbourhood.
2. The ecosystem of mobile journalism refers to the interconnected and
dynamic elements that contribute to the practice and development of journalism using mobile devices. This ecosystem encompasses various components, including tools, platforms, skills, training, and the broader context in which mobile journalism operates. Check Your Progress: 4
1. Other aspects that determine mobile analytics in journalism include user
engagement analytics, platform-specific analytics, audience analytics, mobile content analytics, performance analytics, notifications and alerts analytics and monetisation analytics.
2. Clickbait or eye-catching thumbnails or images entice users to click on the
content; these thumbnails can misinform and disinform citizens and are sometimes misleading, creating fake content.

UNIT 7 MOBILE MULTIMEDIA BASICS
Structure
7.0 Introduction
7.1 Learning Outcomes
7.2 What is Multimedia?
7.2.1 Components of Multimedia
7.3 Mobile Multimedia
7.3.1 Mobile Multimedia Applications
7.3.2 Mobile Multimedia Dynamics
7.3.3 Mobile Multimedia: Architecture & Design
7.3.4 Mobile Multimedia: Audio & Video Concepts
7.3.5 Mobile Multimedia Algorithm
7.4 Graphics & Image Data Analytics
7.4.1 Graphic Formats
7.4.2 Image Data Analytics
7.5 Importance of Colour in Mobile Multimedia
7.6 Multimedia Information Sharing and Retrieval
7.7 Cloud Computing and Multimedia
7.8 Let Us Sum Up
7.9 Key Words
7.10 Further Readings
7.11 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
7.0 INTRODUCTION
With the widespread adoption of smartphones and tablets, mobile multimedia has become everywhere, allowing users to access and create multimedia content anytime, anywhere. Mobile devices, particularly smartphones and tablets, have become integral parts of our daily lives, acting as powerful hubs for multimedia consumption, creation, and communication. Multimedia is the field that deals with the combination of text, graphics, drawings, still and moving images (Video), animation, audio, and any other related media that is arranged, processed, and transmitted digitally. Mobile multimedia helps satisfy user experiences by being a communication vehicle and determines how we consume information. The main capacity of mobile multimedia is its capacity to integrate not only various forms of media, such as text, images, audio, and video, into a single interactive platform but also includes visual information with brilliant graphics, interactive videos, and immersive audio giving a user engagement with a dynamic and engaging environment for users. 117

7.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to: * Critically understand how mobile multimedia can be leveraged in educational contexts; * Learn how to use audio and multimedia tools to make a product that is more engaging and interactive; * Techniques behind producing multimedia information with visually appealing graphics for interactive media; and * They are learning key skills for integrating mobile technology into content development and satisfying social media algorithm expectations.
7.2 WHAT IS MULTIMEDIA?
As the name suggests, ' multi' comprises several different, independent elements integrated for better consumption. If the elements include text, graphics, audio, video, animation, etc., for media users to navigate, interact, create, and communicate, it is essentially called Multimedia. Multimedia is a representation of information keeping in mind both attractive and interactive features of the particular creation with the use of a Multimedia is thus developed to be a basic skill that is essential for communication, which satisfies the objective of the same as reading. Multimedia is giving a new meaning to the nature of reading itself. Instead of limiting the users to the linear presentation of text as printed in books, multimedia makes presentation and reading dynamic by giving words a new dimension through visual typography. A multimedia document in any form of a book can have related information through inter-connected links, thus letting a user navigate the universe of connected information at just a click of a button. This unique capacity of the Internet in the form of multimedia makes the network an Information Superhighway. Multimedia is a powerful tool because researchers opine that users on any platform, for that matter, can retain only 20% of what they see and 30% of what they hear. But they remember 50% of what they see and hear and almost 80% of what they see, hear, and do simultaneously. That is why multimedia provides such a powerful tool for information sharing, redefining the communication system that forms a significant part of our society's infrastructure. In the technological world, the Internet competes with television for people's free time. A Nielsen study reported that Internet users spend more time online than TV. The Internet is a worldwide connection, popularly called the World Wide Web, with more than 72 million computers that use the Internet Protocol (IP) to communicate and share information. Activity 1 Think of an example of an advertisement that is power-packed with visuals. What was the advertisement? What multimedia graphics were used? Did you 118 learn better because of the multimedia? Why or why not?

7.2.1 Components of Multimedia Mobile Multimedia
Basics Multimedia is a multi-faceted form of communication which combines various graphical elements to create meaning. Understanding these components is essential for anyone exploring the diverse and interconnected world of multimedia creation and consumption. * Text: Text is the foundational element that conveys information through written or typed characters. Texts are usually used with other media types to enhance comprehension and communication. Leading and kerning are essential elements of text orientation in multimedia. Typography involves the art and technique of arranging type to make written language legible, readable, and visually appealing. Typography helps establish a clear visual hierarchy within multimedia content. Typefaces, font sizes, line weights, and typeface styles guide the viewer's attention, emphasising key messages or important information. * Graphics: Graphics refer to visual elements such as images, illustrations and diagrams created, designed, or generated to convey information, enhance understanding, or evoke specific emotions. In digital and visual communication, graphics encompass various visual representations, including illustrations, photographs, charts, diagrams, icons, and other visual elements. Images included in graphics include bitmap, clip art or Vector images. Bitmap, otherwise called raster images, consists of pixels, which are small blocks of colour. Vector images include geometric images, including lines, shapes, dots, curves, etc. * Audio: Audio includes sound effects and elements like music and narration. It enhances the sensory experience, adding depth and emotion to multimedia presentations. * Video: A video is a sequence of moving images that underlies a storyline and conveys dynamic information. It encompasses a narrative and visual context, making multimedia more engaging. * Other Elements: Besides these multimedia elements, some other components allow user engagement, such as clickable buttons, hyperlinks, and interactive simulations. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Define Multimedia and its importance in social media.

2. Discuss the importance of multimedia components.

7.3 MOBILE MULTIMEDIA
Multimedia plays a crucial role in elevating user experiences to new heights in mobile devices. Integrating multimedia components enhances how users interact with their devices, fostering a more immersive and enjoyable environment. Mobile multimedia enriches user experiences through many technological innovations, like Augmented reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR). Virtual reality, or VR, is a technological convergence combined with creative invention in multimedia. Goggles, helmets, special gloves, and bizarre human interfaces attempt to place you "inside" a lifelike experience. VR is an extension of multimedia; it uses the basic multimedia elements of imagery, sound, and animation. The advent of 5G technology has significantly impacted mobile multimedia capabilities. With faster data speeds, lower latency, and increased network capacity, 5G facilitates seamless streaming of high-definition videos and real- time multimedia applications.
7.3.1 Mobile Multimedia Applications
One of the predominant applications of Mobile Multimedia in entertainment and Gaming. The entertainment landscape has transformed with the advent of OTT platforms, from streaming services and mobile games to interactive storytelling apps. Platforms like Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hulu, and Disney Hotstar have become synonymous with mobile entertainment. High-quality video streaming, personalised recommendations, and original content have reshaped how users consume movies and TV shows on their mobile devices. The mobile gaming industry has witnessed an unimaginable revolution. From casual games to complex, immersive experiences, mobile devices are now powerful gaming platforms. Augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) technologies further enhance gaming experiences, blurring the lines between the virtual and real worlds.
7.3.2 Mobile Multimedia Dynamics
The dynamics of Mobile Multimedia involve interactive storytelling, which combines multimedia elements with narratives. Social media users can actively participate in stories, making decisions that shape the plot and creating a personalised and engaging entertainment experience. The social media interface involves a multimedia-rich ecosystem, wherein visuals, audio, video, and animation have created seamless integration and shared moments with visually appealing content. User-generated content: Social media platforms sustain and generate 120 the content and news feeds users develop. User-generated content (UGC)

includes any form of content users create, including text, images, videos, and Mobile Multimedia multimedia. This content represents individuals' collective creativity, opinions, Basics and contributions within online communities and is crucial in shaping the digital landscape. Digital First: Digital-first is aligning content strategies with the evolving digital landscape. "Digital-First" refers to a strategic approach where digital platforms and technologies take part in the planning, creating, and distributing of content. This gives a tremendous shift from traditional, offline methods to online and digital channels, acknowledging the transformative impact of technology on audience engagement and content consumption. Real-time Engagement: Real-time engagement involves Live streaming, interactive features, and audience participation through comments, polls, and Q&A sessions. This content-delivering strategy fosters a sense of immediacy and community engagement, enhancing the user experience and building a more authentic connection between content creators and their audience. Activity 2: Analyse the interfaces of gaming platforms for their visual appeal & design. This will be an eye-opener for the next chapter.
7.3.3 Mobile Multimedia: Architecture & Design
Mobile multimedia architecture involves a combination of hardware and software components that enable the creation, storage, transmission, and consumption of multimedia content on mobile devices. Mobile devices serve as the primary endpoints for multimedia consumption. Mobile multimedia design has to be designed in such a way that it manifests the company's vision to other consumers. Making the interface visually pleasing with designs that adhere to the core marketing objectives & strategies and utilising the medium for the betterment of the organisation for which it is created. What makes up Mobile Design? There are six elements in Mobile Design: 1. Context 2. Message / Branding 3. Look and Feel 4. Layout 5. Colour
6. Typography 7. Graphics
7.3.4 Mobile Multimedia: Audio & Video Concepts
Mobile multimedia enriches users' experiences; with the upcoming digital media revolution, the necessity of converting analogue audio into digital format arises through sampling. Audio for generating content must undergo audio compression techniques (e.g., MP3, AAC) for efficient storage and transmission on mobile devices. Social media interfaces have been designed with audio enhancement technologies that modify the audio frequency and equalise it for usage in the platform with in-built audio cancellation. Most gaming and interface devices use InApp Sound design. Regarding video technologies, resolution and aspect ratio vary with social media interfaces, and frame rates and colour representation vary based on platforms. Advancements in technology ensure smooth video accuracy and the ability to stream and cast the video to external displays. 121

Understanding Mojo Exploration of upgraded audio and video codecs in the realm of mobile multimedia, advanced digital audio representation, video compression, playback technologies, and synchronisation as per various social media platforms is vital for developers, content creators, and users, which aim to leverage the full potential of audio and video in the mobile environment.
7.3.5 Mobile Multimedia Algorithm
Social media platforms' interfaces have been designed with built-in algorithms, which play a pivotal role in enabling efficient processing, compression, and enhancement of audio and video content across social media platforms. Audio Compression Algorithms include AAC (Advanced Audio Codec), MP3 (MPEG Audio Layer III, and Opus with adaptive noise cancellation and spectral subtraction. Image and Video enhancement algorithms help enhance the resolution and quality of images and videos, mainly concerning Color Correction and Grading and techniques for balancing the brightness and contrast in videos for better visibility. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Elaborate on the enriching user experiences in Mobile multimedia.

2. Elaborate on Mobile Multimedia Design & Algorithm.

7.4 GRAPHICS & IMAGE DATA ANALYTICS
Graphics and image data analytics play a pivotal role in shaping the visual experiences on mobile devices. The predominant aspect of Graphics and image data analytics is Image data representation, which involves popular image formats like JPEG, PNG, WebP, and HEIF. Image compression is performed using wavelet transforms. Complex statistical data are transformed into visually comprehensible graphics, often called Infographics. As the name suggests, infographics are nothing but information in graphical format. Images used on social media platforms are mostly geotagged to maintain accuracy and authenticity when debunking information. Activity 3 Create a design and make it multifaceted for compatibility across platforms.
122 This will help students understand the aspect ratios and colour schemes across
platforms.

7.4.1 Graphic Formats Mobile Multimedia
Basics Graphic formats are the various file formats used to store and represent graphic or image data. Visual information is encoded, compressed, and stored, influencing factors such as image quality, file size, and compatibility with various applications and devices that are compatible with the platform's significance. Different graphic formats are suitable for specific use cases, and the choice of format depends on factors like the type of image, intended purpose, and desired level of compression. Following are some common graphic formats:
1. GIF (Graphics Interchange Format): GIF is used for simple web graphics
with limited colours. These GIF files are the smallest of the four because they are always reduced to 256 colours, making for fast-loading visuals. GIF is not advisable for files with many colours, like photographs or other detailed imagery. It works best for small graphics like banners, charts and buttons.
2. PNG (Portable Network Graphic): PNG can be used for a small resolution
that maintains its original quality. PNG files support millions of colours, plus varying degrees of transparency -- so they are perfect for graphic image files, like logos and infographics.
3. JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group): JPEG is the format for
online photos. It supports a full spectrum of colours, and almost all devices and programs can open and save to the JPEG format -- making it the most universal of the four.
4. TIFF (Tagged Image File Format): TIFF is best for any bitmap images
you intend to edit. TIFF does not compress to make for smaller files because they are meant to preserve quality. TIFF files offer options to use tags, layers, and transparency and are compatible with photo manipulation programs like Photoshop.
7.4.2 Image Data Analytics
Image data analytics is closely associated with computer vision, a field of artificial intelligence that enables machines to interpret and understand visual information based on user activity across platforms. Analysing image data on social media platforms helps assess the ability and performance of visual content. Metrics such as likes, shares, comments, and click-through rates on images provide valuable insights into audience preferences and behaviour. Image data analytics can be used to identify visual trends and patterns. Staying attuned to these trends enables marketers to create content that aligns with current aesthetics, ensuring relevance and engagement. Images are usually a point of attraction to assess the effectiveness of collaborations and maintain visual content management. It also includes parametrisation based on aspects like sentiment analysis based on visual content, image tagging, and content recommendation. Understanding user preferences through image data analytics enables the production of personalised content and improves brand and marketing strategy. Platforms can use this information to tailor the user experience,

Understanding Mojo providing content that aligns with individual interests. These analytics can help manage risks associated with particular content and identify and mitigate risks associated with inappropriate or harmful content. Automated systems can detect and flag images that violate community guidelines or brand safety standards.
7.5 IMPORTANCE OF COLOR IN MOBILE
MULTIMEDIA
Colour is an important component of any multimedia creation, as it can influence user experience, emotional responses, and the overall visual appeal of content. Colours, apart from their representation, represent emotional association and cultural significance. Each colour, though it denotes a meaning co, connotes a meaning that can be used as an element in mobile multimedia--colour schemes, like complementary, analogous, and monochromatic, help create harmony for multimedia creation. Colours used in multimedia creations can enhance narrative elements and evoke specific moods in multimedia content. Understanding the emotional connotations of warm colours (e.g., red, orange) and cool colours (e.g., blue, green) with the intensity of colours can evoke different emotional responses. For example, warm colours like red and orange may convey excitement or energy, while cool colours like blue and green can evoke calmness or serenity. Using colour strategically allows multimedia creators to influence the audience's emotional response. Colour adds visual and aesthetic appeal to any visual with the prime aim of attracting interest. It sets the tone of the genre in which it is created, thus creating a visually engaging experience for sharing information and setting up the marketing strategy. These meanings of colour can vary across different cultures, examining cultural preferences and their impact on mobile multimedia design. With the upcoming data-driven journalism practices, colour plays a major role in sharing information and organising content. Colours also play a vital role in differentiating and interpreting information in data visualisation methods like graphical representations, pictorial charts, flow charts, etc. Colour plays an important role in establishing brand identity. Most companies associate a particular colour palette to reinforce brand recognition across social media platforms. Even media companies associate themselves with a particular colour palette, making it instantly recognisable to audiences. In multimedia and digital storytelling, colour can be used as characterisation parameters and convey narrative elements within the storyline, giving importance to or highlighting important aspects of a story or creating a specific creative realm or social media atmosphere. Filmmakers, graphic designers, and other multimedia creators use colour to enhance their storytelling experience. Important elements or calls to action can be highlighted with contrasting or vibrant colours, guiding the viewer's eyes to specific areas of interest.

Check Your Progress: 3 Mobile Multimedia
Basics Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Analyse the importance of graphical formats in mobile multimedia.

2. Elaborate on the use of colours in mobile multimedia.

7.6 MULTIMEDIA INFORMATION SHARING
AND RETRIEVAL
The prime motivation behind developing next-generation computer and communications networks is universal access to multimedia information. Furthermore, products are being developed to extend the capabilities in all existing network connections to support multimedia traffic. The rapid evolution of these networks has come about because of new technological advances, heightened public expectations, and lucrative entrepreneurial opportunities. Multimedia, which includes data, voice, graphics, still images, audio, and video, requires network support to transmit multiple media. The media to be transmitted, often called sources, are represented in digital form, and the networks used to transmit the digital source representations may be classified as digital communications networks, even though analogue modulation is often used for free-space propagation or multiplexing advantages. Multimedia engages users more effectively than content with only texts. The multimedia element gives its users an appealing gesture through its visuals and typography, which leads to increased attention, understanding, and retention of information. The visual and interactivity aspect of multimedia makes the shared content more interactive and simulated. Multimedia information sharing involves exchanging and disseminating information incorporating various media elements. It facilitates communication, collaboration, and the distribution of knowledge in a richer and more engaging format. Any information for multimedia operations across mobile platforms utilises adaptive streaming technologies to deliver multimedia content based on varying network conditions and device capabilities. Compression techniques reduce file sizes and ensure faster content loading on mobile devices without compromising quality with a wide range of devices and platforms. Common formats include MP4 for videos and JPEG or WebP for images. 125

Understanding Mojo These multimedia information creations are usually stored in cloud-based storage solutions, enabling seamless retrieval of multimedia content stored across various devices. This allows users to access their media libraries regardless of their device.
7.7 CLOUD COMPUTING AND MULTIMEDIA
As mentioned, cloud-based storage allows users to access multimedia information across devices with a broadband Internet facility. Cloud storage and retrieval ensure seamless accessibility across multimedia devices like a computer, tablet, or mobile phone. These multimedia creations stored in the cloud can be accessed across different operating systems and devices, providing a consistent experience for users regardless of the platform they are using. Popular cloud-based storage solutions that support multimedia content include Google Drive, Dropbox, Microsoft OneDrive, and Amazon S3. Users wishing to share these multimedia creations can share links to specific files or folders for easy collaboration and content sharing across platforms. Some platforms even support real-time collaboration on documents or multimedia projects, thus providing compatibility across platforms. So, what is Cloud storage? What is the technology behind that? Cloud computing is the current buzzword in the Information Technology (IT) industry. It involves accessing on-demand computing resources via the Internet, such as software, storage, and even infrastructure. Cloud computing has existed in concept for nearly 50 years; however, only recently has technology progressed to the point where it has become a multi- billion dollar annual industry. In simpler terms, cloud computing can be defined as Emailing information to yourself from the office and then retrieving and using that information at home. A simple explanation for cloud computing would be storing data and information away from our physical location, not on local hard disks or servers. Access is obtained via the Internet when the need arises to use that data or reference that information. Since access to that data and information is via the Internet, it is available from anywhere via the Internet. Access to data and information is not confined to any location, which is the essence of cloud computing. "Clouds are a large pool of easily usable and accessible virtualised resources (such as hardware, development platforms and/or services). These resources can be dynamically reconfigured to adjust to a variable load (scale), allowing also for an optimum resource utilisation. This pool of resources is typically exploited by a pay-per-use model in which guarantees are offered by the Infrastructure Provider by means of customised SLA [Service Level Agreement]". Clouds can be seen somewhere in the sky whenever we look up, regardless of physical location. Whenever we connect to the Internet, data and information are available regardless of physical location. There are claims of technical reasons behind the name. Network configuration diagrams show connections 126 to the Internet away from the local area network (LAN) and virtual private

network (VPN) connections with a fluffy cloud symbol, as in Figure 7.1. Any Mobile Multimedia organisation or institution that uses an Internet application can claim to be Basics computing in the cloud. Network users have been connecting to network servers for all the needed services. Cloud computing connects all services to the Internet [cloud] instead of connecting them to the network servers. All services are available wherever we are, as long as there is a connection to the Internet. With such portability and flexibility in the computing environment, businesses can reach their customers 24/7 anywhere in the world. Students can study online courses from anywhere in the world. Individuals can socialise on the Internet and Skype and do whatever they want, from wherever they are and whenever they want.
Fig 7.1: Representation of Cloud Computing
Cloud computing services are responsible for maintaining and updating the underlying infrastructure. This relieves users from the burden of managing storage and helps creators to concentrate on creating and managing multimedia content. There are a lot of cloud service providers who help to protect stored multimedia data with proper encryption, access controls, and regular security audits. Cloud computing services integrate storing, retrieving, and processing multimedia files, providing a more cohesive and efficient user experience. Cloud computing follows a pay-as-you-go model, allowing users to pay only for the storage and resources they consume. This eliminates the need for organisations to invest in and maintain expensive local storage infrastructure, leading to cost savings. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write notes on Multimedia Information Sharing

Understanding Mojo 2. Discuss about cloud computing and its importance in technological existence.

7.8 LET US SUM UP
Let us sum up the major points we discussed is this unit: * Multimedia is the field that deals with the combination of text, graphics, drawings, still and moving images (Video), animation, audio, and any other related media that is arranged, processed, and transmitted digitally. * Mobile multimedia helps satisfy user experiences by being a communication vehicle and determines how we consume information. * Multimedia is a multi-faceted form of communication which combines various graphical elements to create meaning. * Multimedia information sharing and retrieval in the mobile landscape are dynamic processes influenced by technological advancements, user behaviours, and ethical considerations.
7.9 KEYWORDS
Multimedia is a multi-faceted form of communication that combines various graphical elements to create meaning. Clickable buttons are interactive elements commonly used in user interfaces to trigger actions or navigate within a system or application. Hyperlinks: Hyperlinks, often referred to simply as links, are elements in digital content that allow users to navigate from one location to another within the same document or to external resources on the Internet. Interactive simulations refer to computer-based models or representations allowing users to engage with and manipulate system elements actively. Branding: Branding is a strategic process and a set of activities that involves creating a unique and memorable identity for a product, service, company, or individual. Typography: Typography is the art and technique of arranging and designing text to make written language legible, readable, and visually appealing. It encompasses various elements such as typefaces, fonts, line spacing, letter spacing, and overall text layout. Resolution is the number of pixels (individual points of colour) on a display monitor, expressed as the number of pixels on the horizontal and vertical axes. Infographics, as the name suggests, are nothing but information in a graphical 128 format.

Mobile Multimedia
7.10 FURTHER READINGS
Basics
1. Gibson, J. D. (2001). Multimedia Communications: Directions and
Innovations. A volume in Communications, Networking and Multimedia. Academic Press.
2. Sloane, A. (1996). Multimedia Communication. McGraw Hill.
7.11 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Multimedia integrates different media forms, such as text, graphics,
audio, video, and interactive elements, to create a cohesive and dynamic communication experience. It involves using various media types to convey information, entertain, and engage an audience, often leveraging the strengths of each medium to enhance overall communication effectiveness.
2. In social media, Multimedia plays a pivotal role in shaping user experiences,
driving engagement, and compellingly conveying messages. Here's why multimedia is crucial in the context of social media. Multimedia components, encompassing text, graphics, audio, video, and interactive elements, are essential in various domains because they enhance communication, engagement, and overall user experiences. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Mobile multimedia enriches user experiences through technological
innovations, such as augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR).
2. Mobile multimedia design has to manifest the company's vision to other
consumers. Social media platform interfaces have been designed with built- in algorithms, which play a pivotal role in enabling efficient processing, compression, and enhancement of audio and video content across social media platforms. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Graphical formats play a crucial role in mobile multimedia due to their
impact on user experience, content presentation, and overall engagement. Graphical formats, such as images, videos, and animations, enhance the visual appeal of mobile applications and content. Visually attractive interfaces capture users' attention and encourage engagement. High-quality graphics create a positive first impression, making users more likely to explore the app or multimedia content.
2. Colour is not merely a visual element but a powerful tool that shapes the
user experience and communicates emotions and information in mobile multimedia. As mobile technologies advance, understanding the nuances of colour in mobile multimedia will remain crucial for designers, developers, and content creators seeking to captivate audiences and convey compelling narratives.

Understanding Mojo Check Your Progress: 4
1. Multimedia information sharing and retrieval in the mobile landscape
are dynamic processes influenced by technological advancements, user behaviours, and ethical considerations. As mobile multimedia continues to evolve, addressing challenges and prioritising user experience and privacy will be essential for creating robust and responsible multimedia sharing and retrieval ecosystems.
2. In simpler terms, cloud computing can be defined as Emailing information
to yourself from the office and then retrieving and using that information at home. Cloud computing refers to delivering services over the Internet, including storage, processing power, networking, databases, and more. Instead of relying on local servers or personal devices for computing resources, users can access and use these services through remote servers hosted by cloud service providers. Cloud computing offers a scalable and on-demand model, allowing users to pay for only the resources they consume.

UNIT 8 INTRODUCTION TO MOBILE
APPLICATIONS
Structure
8.1 Introduction
8.2 Learning Outcomes
8.3 Considerations and Challenges for Mobile App
8.4 PC Based Applications
8.5 Web Based Applications
8.5.1 Presentation Layer
8.5.2 Web Content Management Layer
8.5.3 E-commerce Layer
8.5.4 Integration Layer/Services Layer
8.5.5 Security Layer
8.6 Evolution of Mobile-Based Applications
8.7 Comparison of Mobile Apps with Web Applications
8.8 Content and Protocol in Mobility
8.9 Trends in Mobility Space
8.10 A Brief Note on Mobile App Platforms
8.11 Let Us Sum Up
8.12 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
8.13 Further Readings
8.1 INTRODUCTION
As we have witnessed a revolution in the consumer space toward mobility, most analysts have identified that mobile devices are the major gateways to the Internet compared to desktop browsers. Mobile devices are replacing all traditional channels to access information. To align with this trend, enterprises, too, are designing digital applications to cater to a wide array of mobile devices and platforms. Mobile application development involves developing applications for mobile devices such as Personal Digital Assistants (PDA), tablets, smartphones, and others. Native mobile apps are designed to run on a specific mobile platform, sometimes a specific mobile operating system, and supported hardware. Mobile applications are part of the mainstream digital strategy for business- to-consumer (B2C) enterprises. Most enterprises are now adopting a "mobile- first" strategy, wherein digital applications are designed, developed, and tested

Understanding Mojo for mobile devices; mobile users attain the primary focus of the digital strategy. Disruption in the mobility space has a major impact on enterprises' revenues. Mobile apps are shaping user experiences, providing real-time information, and offering more engaging experiences for users. Mobility-based digital strategy considers various things such as user experience, performance, interactivity, device form factors, device limitations, location needs and personalization.
Key Drivers for Mobile Applications
The following are the key drivers of mobile apps: * Innovations in the mobile space, such as the proliferation of smartphones and the higher bandwidths offered by 3G (Third generation) and 4G (Fourth generation) technologies, are coupled with higher capacity storage technologies with higher speed chips, which will continue to power mobile devices. * Consumer behaviour: Customers are more used to mobile devices, and it is easy to access information on the move. * Personalised content delivery: The enterprise can leverage location and sensors to offer more contextualised, relevant, personalised content, offers, and advertisements. * Mobile ecosystem: An explosive growth in mobile application stores such as Apple, Google Play, and Windows marketplace stores was coupled with the availability of games, utilities, and other apps. * Social Networking: With the popularity of Web 2.0 and social media technologies such as Facebook and Twitter, users increasingly use location-based features in social media platforms. Impact of Mobile Apps on various domains Mobile apps are impacting various industry verticals and functional domains. Given below are high-level changes enabled by mobile apps across industries: * Retail and Consumer Packaged Goods (CPG) Industry: Mobile apps provide location-based store locator, targeted promotions/offers/ coupons, service reminders, mobile bidding, in-store tools, cross-sell/ upsell and comparator tools. Mobile apps are key in driving traffic and increasing sales and brand loyalty. On the B2B front, mobile apps have redefined lead management, CRM functions, efficient tracking, field force automation, etc. Mobile apps have also improved in-store merchandise, supply chain and inventory management. * Banking industry: Mobile apps enable convenient ways to carry out transactions such as account balance, payment, localised alerts, tap- to-pay, branch locator, and payment coupons. They would also enable mobile banking and wallets and provide "on-the-go" features. * Logistics: Mobile apps make tracking shipments, getting updates, and 132 managing the warehouse and fleet easier.

* Healthcare: Mobile apps can connect patients, doctors, and insurance Introduction to
Mobile Apps
providers and provide wellness management solutions. Besides the enterprise scenarios mentioned above, mobile apps have revolutionised the consumer space, with various apps related to gaming, utilities, social media, video streaming, and more.
Attributes of Mobile Applications
The following are the key attributes of mobile applications: * Ubiquity: Mobile applications are always available and connected and enable users to access information anytime, anywhere * User-friendliness: Mobile applications provide responsive and interactive user interfaces with essential information. They utilise the camera, sensors, media output, and touch/multi-touch/voice interface to provide simplified actionable information. * Location awareness: Mobile applications use the Global Positioning System (GPS) and other sensors to provide location-sensitive information. * Minimalistic: The content and features in mobile apps are minimal, which is essential for the functionality.
8.2 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After readings this unit, you should be able to: * Understand key concepts of mobile app development; * Know the opportunities and challenges of mobile apps; * Know the details of PC-based apps as well as web-based apps; * Know the content and key protocols of mobile apps; * Know the evolution of mobile apps; and * Comparison of mobile apps and web apps and upcoming trends in the mobility space.
8.3 CONSIDERATIONS AND CHALLENGES
FOR MOBILE APP
The main considerations for mobile apps are given in Figure 8.1 Figure 8.1: Mobile App Considerations 133

Understanding Mojo The main considerations for mobile app design are listed below: * The intended utility of the mobile app * Consumer engagement with richer user experience * Productivity through efficient flows * Driving incremental revenue through user stickiness * Customer conversion * User loyalty through targeted and personalised offers * App Architecture * Native vs hybrid vs web-based on the requirements * Middleware requirement for centralised configuration * Offline vs online capability for storing data * App Development Principles * User experience through richer controls and interactive components * Compatibility on various devices and platforms * Performance for each screen and task * Security for data * Productivity enhancement tools * Target users * Consumers for B2C apps * Business for Business to Business (B2B) apps * Partners for B2B apps * Employees for Business to Employee (B2E) apps * Testing * Device testing * Performance testing * Various testing scenarios The main challenges in mobile app strategy are given below: * Diversity of devices and heterogeneous technologies: Various mobile platforms and devices exist. The app should provide an optimal experience in all scenarios. * Security: The mobile app should ensure data security during transmission and storage. * User experience: The mobile app should provide optimal user experience by leveraging the device's capabilities to provide the highest engagement possible.

* Network: Mobile apps should be designed to work in regions with Introduction to network, latency and bandwidth challenges. Mobile Apps * Compliance with diverse standards, OS, mobile platforms and devices.
8.4 PC BASED APPLICATIONS
Personal Computer (PC)- based applications are software programs developed to run on specific operating systems and hardware platforms. These pioneer applications were used during the initial days of software development. There are two main types of PC-based applications: stand-alone and client-server.
8.4.1 Stand-alone PC Applications
Stand-alone PC applications are independent software programs that run on an OS. These applications do not typically use network resources or support multi-user mode. Utility programs such as word processors, calculators, and media players fall into this category. Each application had a good user interface for the PC user to interact.
8.4.2 Client Server Applications
In client-server applications, each terminal PC has client software connected to a centralized server software. The client program gets input from the end user and submits the details to the server software through a dedicated session established through the network. These applications were also referred to as "thick clients." Database software, networked games, banking software, and a network file system are some examples of this category of applications. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. is an attribute related to mobile app availability.
2. are independent software programs which
would run on an OS. Table: 3. and, are two key components of client-server applications.
4. The main target users for mobile apps are
Table: 5. Native vs hybrid is related to, consideration.
8.5 WEB-BASED APPLICATIONS
Internet-enabled applications mainly rendered on desktop browsers are categorised as web applications. Most modern web applications follow a layered Model-View-Controller (MVC) architecture, which supports loose coupling and flexible modular components.

Understanding Mojo A typical MVC-based web application is depicted in Figure 8.2:
Fig. 8.2: MVC Web Application
The key layers of the MVC framework are shown below: * Presentation layer (View layer): User experience components such as portlets, widgets, pages, User Interface (UI) modules, buttons, and forms are present in this layer. Modern web applications normally use JavaScript components to build the UI modules. The UI modules will mainly render the view portion of the application. View components communicate with the back end through services. Modern web applications use Representational State Transfer (REST) based lightweight services. * Business layer: This layer comprises components that implement business logic and rules. It mainly consists of a rules engine, search, business objects, workflows, business process management (BPM), caching frameworks, and other entities. All business modules expose services to the presentation layer. * Data layer (model layer): This layer mainly consists of persistence handling components such as database access components, Data access objects (DAO), query components, and Object-Rational Mapping (ORM) frameworks. Besides these layers, we also have security components (responsible for authentication and authorization) in the security layer and utility components to handle cross-cutting concerns. Figure 8.3 depicts a complex n-tier enterprise web application. It shows various layers for enterprise search, content management, and e-commerce with various enterprise interfaces.

Introduction to
Mobile Apps
Fig. 8.3: N-tier Enterprise Web Application
The multi-layered architecture is mainly based on MVC architecture:
8.5.1 Presentation Layer
This involves the presentation components like portlets and other user experience components. Key components are explained below: * Personalization: Role-based access and other fine-grained access control to provide personalised user experience. * Widgets: Wherever required, jQuery-based client-side widgets would be developed to provide client-side functionalities. This would help enhance the overall user experience and improve the page performance. Real-time report data display/refresh, pagination, and search functionality are typical scenarios where this AJAX-based feature can be employed. * Multi-device support: Responsive design and device recognition features will be leveraged to cater to various mobile devices. * Page layouts: Flexible page layout to cater to various web pages. * Information architecture and navigation models: This consists of context menus, bread crumbs, left navigation, site map, and site hierarchy for the website.
8.5.2 Web Content Management Layer
The web content management layer consists of the following modules: 137

Understanding Mojo * Content authoring using authoring templates. * Content tagging with relevant metadata and tags. * Content publishing to various targets and in various formats. * Asset management of various digital assets, documents and multimedia files. * Workflow for managing the content approval, publishing and update processes.
8.5.3 E-commerce Layer
E-commerce modules usually consist of modules related to catalogue management, order management, modules for shopping carts, promotion, cross-sell and up-sell, and product information management.
8.5.4 Integration Layer/Services Layer
The solutions use a business service layer for integration with external systems. The integration strategy is based on Service Bus Architecture, in which the middleware can act as a service bus linking multiple applications that require services of each other through a central service layer. The service bus becomes a point of data interchange and manages the communication with each peripheral application independently. All service invocations will be done through the ESB layer. JMS component will be developed to send and receive the messages to the ESB message destination. Application/System services will be developed and exposed to the ESB layer.
8.5.5 Security Layer
The security layer consists of authentication, authorization and single sign-on modules.
8.6 EVOLUTION OF MOBILE-BASED
APPLICATIONS
A brief overview of various stages of mobile app development is depicted in Figure 8.4.138 Fig. 8.4: Evolution of mobile app

The core features of the various stages of mobile app evolution are detailed Introduction to below: Mobile Apps * Embedded systems: We have embedded systems such as calculators on various devices in this category. These systems have limited functionality. * Device-specific apps: Applications specific to a device are part of this category. For instance, device-specific games and other utility apps fall into this category. * OS-specific apps: Operating system-specific apps such as games and media players fall into this category. * Cloud-based apps: In this category, we have always available cloud- based apps.
8.7 COMPARISON OF MOBILE APPS WITH
WEB APPLICATIONS
A high-level comparison of mobile apps with web applications is given in the following table 8.1:
Table 8.1: Mobile App Vs Web Application
Criteria Web Application Mobile App
User experience Provides a good experience Mobile apps can leverage full device optimised for desktop capabilities and offer a rich experience browsers. to users. Mobile apps provide a rich branding experience to users. Performance Web applications provide Native mobile apps provide high good performance based on performance. performance optimizations. Location Web applications provide Mobile apps provide location-sensitive awareness relatively less location- and contextual information awareness Development We can have a single code We need multiple code bases to cost base and lower development support various mobile platforms, and maintenance costs. resulting in higher maintenance costs. Access Desktop browsers and mobile mainly access web applications. mechanism browsers Mobile browsers and mobile devices access mobile apps. User Web applications use a Mobile apps provide intuitive features intuitive limited amount of device using the device's camera, sensors, features features. GPS, etc. and provide notifications to users. Interactivity Web applications provide Mobile apps offer high-level interactive interfaces through interactivity through a touch interface. widgets.

Criteria Web Application Mobile App
Applicability Web applications are Gaming, location-specific applications normally used as Information such as car rental, store locator, and display platforms reporting apps. Personalization Web applications Mobile apps provide a high degree offer personalization of personalization through various features through server-side context parameters such as location, preferences. history, etc. Common use News, blogs. Games, social media and location- cases related services.
8.8 CONTENT AND PROTOCOL IN MOBILITY
The content for mobile apps is designed to be adaptive. Adaptive content uses rules to adapt itself based on the context. Context includes parameters such as device, location, time, form factor, mobile platform, screen resolution, personalization parameters, preferences, etc. Hence, adaptive content provides a superior information delivery experience for mobile users. Let us look at a couple of examples of adaptive content in the context of mobile apps. We would have a long and short product description for a regular product page. If the product content is designed to be adaptive, the long description would be rendered on desktop browsers and tables with higher page real estate, and only short descriptions would be delivered on smartphones with lesser screen layouts. Similarly, role-based content filtering and location--and time- based content filtering can be done using adaptive rules. Responsive design mainly accommodates flexible page layouts and screens. A responsive page design and adaptive content combination would be ideal for mobile scenarios. The main protocols used in mobile apps are as follows; * Wireless Application Protocol (WAP): It provides specifications and rules for wireless communication devices like smartphones. WAP is optimised for low-memory, low-bandwidth mobile devices. * Representational State Transfer (REST): Responsive mobile web applications communicate with servers using lightweight REST calls. Normally, JSON data is used in REST services for data exchange.
8.9 TRENDS IN MOBILITY SPACE
The following are some of the trends in the mobility space: * HTML 5-based responsive apps: HTML 5 technologies would help developers develop responsive web applications catering to all mobile devices. * Bring your device (BYOD): Employees can bring their own mobile devices to work and work simplification.

* Internet of Things (IoT): Provides real-time data through sensors Introduction to and other connected devices to the mobile. Wearables are increasingly Mobile Apps gaining traction, and mobile devices will consume the data published from wearables. * Mobile device management (MDM): Managing various device configurations, security, and policies. * Mobile application management (MAM): Managing version, delivery and provision of various apps. * There has been an increased variety of communications, such as touch, voice, facial/gesture recognition, video, scanning, and near-field communications. * Location-based real-time alerts and notifications and other innovative features such as route optimization. * Mobility as a service (MaaS): MaaS is to accelerate time to market and reduce complexity.
8.10 BRIEF NOTE ON MOBILE APP
PLATFORMS
Let us look at two popular mobile app development platforms: iOS and Android. Android Android is an open-source mobile development platform based on Java and maintained by Google. The key features supported by Android are SQLite- based lightweight storage, SMS and MMS messaging, multi-lingual support, and mobile browsers. Other key features are multi-touch support, multi- tasking, voice features, external storage, etc. Android development needs an Android SDK, libraries, emulator and Eclipse IDE. Testing can be done using Android testing APIs. We can deploy Android apps to the Google Play store. Apple iOS iOS is the mobile OS for Apple devices. The development on iOS happens using Objective C. iOS supports many features such as iMessage, iCloud, Siri, etc. iOS provides in-built apps such as mail, notifications, contacts calendar, bookmarks, sync, etc. iOS development includes iOS SDK (XCode), iOS Simulator, XCode IDE, and other frameworks for building iOS apps. For mobile web development, we could use numerous JavaScript frameworks such as SenchaTouch, jQuery Mobile, jQTouch and software such as PhoneGap that are used for mobile web development.

Understanding Mojo Check Your Progress: 2
Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) The layer is responsible for presentation
components in MVC architecture.
2) The layer is concerned with centralised service
access.
3) Lightweight service invocation in mobile apps can be done through
4) .is a popular open-source mobile platform.
8.11 LET US USM UP
This unit discussed the main considerations and challenges in mobile app development. We then discussed PC-based applications, including stand-alone and client-server applications. We then had a detailed discussion of web-based applications designed using MVC architecture. We also looked at various stages of mobile app development. We compared mobile apps with web applications and looked at mobile apps' content and protocols. We summarised brief trends and an overview of key mobile platforms.
8.12 FURTHER READINGS
References * https://developer.apple.com/ * http://developer.android.com/ * https://play.google.com * http://phonegap.com/ * http://jquerymobile.com/ * http://www.sencha.com/ * http://www.wirelessweek.com/articles/2011/03/15-trends-matter * http://www.wirelessweek.com/articles/2009/11/innovation-fragmentation * http://www.androidauthority.com/android-vs-blackberry-pros-and-cons- 31084/ * http://bgr.com/2013/09/19/mobile-app-store-downloads-102- billion-2013/ * http://www.wired.com/images_blogs/gadgetlab/2010/04/android-os- marketshare2.jpg * http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS23946013 * http://www.webpronews.com/ios-android-app-store-android-market- millennial-media-mobile-mi-2011-04

Introduction to
8.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
Mobile Apps
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1) Ubiquity.
2) Stand-alone PC applications
3) Client terminal and Server software
4) Consumers, businesses and employees
5) App Architecture
Check Your Progress: 2
1) View layer
2) Integration/services layer
3) REST calls
4) Android

UNIT 9 APPS FOR MOJO
Structure
9.0 Introduction
9.1 Learning Outcomes
9.2 Capture and Recording Apps
9.3 Editing and Post-Production Apps
9.4 Live Streaming Apps
9.5 Social Media and Content Distribution Apps
9.6 Note-Taking and Organization Apps
9.7 Collaboration and Communication Apps
9.8 Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) Apps
9.9 Location and Navigation Apps
9.10 Security and Encryption Apps
9.11 Let Us Sum Up
9.12 Keywords
9.13 Further Readings
9.14 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
9.0 INTRODUCTION
Smith (2019), a journalism student in her blog post, writes about the shift in journalism training she encountered during her journalism studies. As an undergraduate student, she was required to have a DSLR camera and voice recorder, which was mandated by her school for photojournalism, multimedia and news writing. By the time she joined the graduate school a couple of years later, she was only required to have an iPhone for everything. In a matter of a few years, profound changes in news technology have majorly affected the field of journalism. She adds that with these technological changes, all journalists are now gatekeepers and have in their pockets the tech needed to record, photograph, film, write, edit, polish, and publish a multimedia news piece. She feels this brings a new meaning to "freedom of the press". Mobile Journalism, or MoJo's mainstay, is mobile phones and the tools that power them for news stories. Many apps provide the power to record interviews, photograph and film people and events, and write, edit, and publish multimedia news. Today, regardless of whether one's phone is running Android or iOS, many 144 apps are available for MoJo. For the convenience of students, apps have been

broadly classified under various categories. These categories are not watertight, Apps for Mojo and apps can be used cross-category. Besides the listed categories, there are miscellaneous apps for audio recording and editing, interview and transcription, translation, and many other functions a journalist requires daily for a news story.
9.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After readings this unit, you should be able to: * Learn about the various types of mobile apps available for recording, photographing, filming, writing, editing, and publishing multimedia news pieces; * Learn about mobile apps that help provide collaboration and communication, location and navigation, and security and encryption; and * Learn about apps at the cutting edge of technology, i.e. Augmented Reality (AR).
9.2 CAPTURE AND RECORDING APPS
Fox (2021), writing for "Lifewire," lists the eight best recording apps for iPhone and Android phones. He notes that with the improvements in mobile camera technology, the average smartphone matches the standalone digital cameras. The top three, according to his list, are: Filmic: A USA-based company acquired in 2022 by Italy-based Bending Spoons, is the number 1 recording app. Fox feels it had the best interface among available options, a full range of professional features and output comparable with pro-grade camcorders. The app is available for both Android and iPhone. Also, the app brings features from professional video cameras like zebra stripes from exposure warnings, focus peaking, and log gamma curve recording, plus manual controls for most functions. Not only does it support various file format options, but it also has professional audio quality with granular control and advanced tools. It is a paid product and offers in-app purchases for many professional features. Screenshot of the Filmic Pro website https://www.filmicpro.com/

Understanding Mojo MAVIS: This iOS-only app is free but has extra features bundled with a cost. As per Fox, this app has professional features and the broadest audio recording options. Its shooting assistant options include zebra bars, false colour for exposure, and focus peaking. It also includes selectable bitrates and embedded time codes for video files. Some photographers prefer this over Filmic. Screenshot of the MAVIS website https://www.shootmavis.com/ MoviePro is an iOS-only app with a lower price and fewer options than Filmic. According to Fox, the app offers manual controls for nearly all features and a range of video recording options. It also offers flexible audio recording, monitoring, and a Bluetooth microphone input option. Screenshot of the MoviePro website https://www.moviepro.app/ Fox recommends the other recording apps: Open Camera (https://opencamera. sourceforge.io/), an Android app; Camera MX (https://www.magix.com/us/ apps/cameramx/), an Android app; ProMovie Recorder (https://promovieapp. com/), an iOS app; Videoshop Video Editor (https://videoshop.net/), an iOS and Android app; and LumaFusion (https://luma-touch.com/lumafusion-for-ios/), an iOS app.

There are a lot of capture apps for creating new content for social and other Apps for Mojo channels. Read (2022), head of content at Buffer Inc. has a list of apps, some of which are: MuseCam is an iOS app that helps users shoot and edit photos with professional camera features like presents, manual camera controls, and HSL (hue, saturation, lightness). # Screenshot of MuseCam website https://musecam.co/ VSCO (formerly VSCO Cam) is a free and paid app for iOS and Android that enables users to capture, edit, share, and discover photos. It offers many high- quality filters and a host of free editing tools, such as fade, clarity, skin tone, tint, sharpen, saturation, temperature, etc., with the option of manual adjustment. # Screenshot of VSCO website https://www.vsco.co/ Halide Mark II for iPhone and iPad enhances the mobile photo experience. Screenshot of Halide website https://halide.cam/

Understanding Mojo Besides the above apps Read lists out "Manual" for iOS (http://shootmanual. co/); "Camera +" for iOS (http://camera.plus); "Camera FV-5" for Android (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.flavionet.android. camera.lite) and "Spark Camera" an iOS app to capture photos and video in full 1080p HD for Instagram Stories and Instagram Reels.
9.3 EDITING AND POST-PRODUCTION APPS
Grannel (2023), writing in "Techradar", lists his top 6 apps for best video editing, which can be used by all types of users, including the ones promoting their business on social media platforms like Instagram, Facebook, and TikTok. He writes that mobile video editing apps today come with various tools and effects and have become easier to use, even for beginners. His top picks are based on the user interface, editing experience, platform availability, performance and pricing, and they are: Power Director 365: An Android and iOS app from Cyberlink, it has a free and paid version that unlocks all features. It is at the top of Grannel's list because of its simplicity, with easy import, edit, and export video functionality. Screenshot of the Power Director 365 website https://www.cyberlink.com/ products/powerdirector-video-editing-software/overview_en_IN.html?r=1 Adobe Premiere Rush is a beginner's app for iOS and Android from Adobe. As per Grannel, the app is capable and has a standardised interface across platforms. However, it requires a Creative Cloud subscription from Adobe and is less feature-packed than the Premium Pro version.

Screenshot of the Adobe website https://www.adobe.com/products/premiere- rush.html LumaFusion is an iOS, iPad, and Android app that, according to Grannel, has an easy interface, additional tools, and professional editing functions and doesn't require a subscription. The app is equivalent to desktop video editing software and feels complicated to an average user. It has a multi-track editor for video and audio, overlaid effects, music, and voice-over features. The app can even work with footage shot in 4K. Screenshot of LumaFusion website https://luma-touch.com/

Understanding Mojo Some of the other editing apps recommended by Grannel are "DaVinci Resolve" (https://www.blackmagicdesign.com/products/davinciresolve) a free app for iPad; "KineMaster" (https://www.kinemaster.com/en) for Android, iOS and iPad which needs a subscription for unlocking some tools and "Apple iMovie" (https://apps.apple.com/us/app/imovie/id377298193) a free app for iOS, iPad and macOS.
9.4 LIVE STREAMING APPS
Duhamel (2023) writes about the best live-streaming apps for mobile broadcasting. She adds that there are various aspects of the everyday world that people would want to watch on video, too, while it is lifestreaming in real-time, as the experience of watching in real-time makes for better viewing and better news value. Hence, live streaming videos have become an essential part of content strategy for many businesses, including the news business. The apps she selected allow one to easily share and promote content even while recording and storing it for future use. The main features of live streaming apps are Adaptive Bitrate Streaming, TML5 video player, multi-bitrate Streaming or Transco ding, LS protocol, and RTMP. Other features that need to be considered are Mobile support, overall design, video quality, video effects and customisation, comments and sharing, and Multistreaming. According to Duhamel, some of the best liver streaming apps are: Larix Broadcaster is a free app available for iOS and Android. It offers a wide range of features, including screencasting, which helps record one's screen for live streaming. Other features include RTMP and RTSP publishing, streams to multiple services like YouTube Live and Twitch, and Adaptive Bitrate Streaming. Screenshot of Larix Broadcaster website https://softvelum.com/larix/ nanoStream: Paid app for both iOS and Android platforms, has extremely low latency even to large audiences and offers multi streams. Gamers, auctioneers, e-learners, and software developers are the segments that use this app.

Screenshot of nanoStream website https://www.nanocosmos.de/v6/index.html Wirecast Go: This is the mobile app version of Wirecast, a live-streaming software platform that works only on iPhones. Its key features include broadcasting in portrait or landscape mode, switching between multiple prepared shots, adding logos and branding to a live stream, and capturing and replaying live broadcast highlights. Screenshot of Wirecast Go website https://www.telestream.net/wirecast-go/ overview.htm There are other apps besides the above three, some of them being: "AIRMIX" for iOS live streaming (https://teradek.com/pages/airmix); "BroadcastMe" for both iOS and Android (https://www.streamaxia.com/); "YouNow" for both iOS and Android (https://www.younow.com/explore) etc. Besides the specialised live streaming app, social media platforms allow live streaming. Examples include YouTube, with a massive user base on which one can stream either using a desktop or mobile with or without streaming software (also called an encoder); Facebook Live allows one to go live if one already has an audience on the platform directly from a mobile on desktop; Instagram Live has become a popular choice for mobile live streaming with the option of integrating an Instagram account with a Facebook profile or page so that one's live stream will also appear on Facebook; Twitch a very popular sites for live streaming mainly focused on gaming and tech and TikTok a short-form video sharing app.

Understanding Mojo Check Your Progress: 1
Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Give examples of editing and post-production apps with examples of
features which make them equivalent to standalone digital cameras.

2. What are some of the essential features of a live streaming app for MoJo's?
Give some examples of live-streaming apps.

9.5 SOCIAL MEDIA AND CONTENT
DISTRIBUTION APPS
Wilpert (2023), writing on content distribution platforms, divides them into three subsections: niche Media Platforms, Social Media Platforms, and Paid Media Platforms. He further divides these platforms into free and paid. Under niche media platforms, Wilpert lists apps like "Quuu Promote" (https:// quuu.co/ ), which lets one select the most relevant category for a piece of content and promote that content via people who have signed up to share content in that category with the Quuu app; "Slofile" (https://slofile.com/) which lists public Slack group across all different niches and allows one to participate in the group discussion and "HARO" (https://www.helpareporter.com/) which connects journalists seeking expertise to include in their content with sources who have that expertise. In addition to the above apps, he lists apps like Product Hunt, Triberr Promote, BuySellAds, Buzzfeed Advertise, and Facebook Groups, where disparate virtual groups are formed to collect and share content. Most of the above platforms, except Facebook groups, are not commonly heard in India. Screenshot of the Buzzfeed website https://advertise.buzzfeed.com/

Screenshot of the HARO website https://www.helpareporter.com/ Social Media Platforms which run on both iOS and Android are more familiar to students; for example, Instagram a photo and video-sharing social networking platform, Snapchat a multimedia messaging app, Pinterest that uses images to discover new content on the Internet and popular for sharing recipes, home ideas, travel ideas, style inspiration, and more, YouTube a video sharing app, Facebook lets people connect with friends, family, and other people one knows, LinkedIn a professional networking platform, Reddit a discussion app, Twitter (now X) a microblogging and news sharing app etc. Then there are paid media platforms like Google Ads, where one can pay to display advertisements, service offerings, product listings, and video content and generate mobile application installs within the Google ad network; Facebook Ads, Bing Ads, Snapchat Ads, Twitter(X) Ads, Pinterest Ads, etc. Screenshot of Pinterest Ads website https://ads.pinterest.com/ Wilpert believes the key to choosing the right content platforms for pushing your content should be based on a content distribution strategy that focuses on using all three types of platforms, i.e., niche, social, and paid.
9.6 NOTE-TAKING AND ORGANISATION
APPS
Moreau (2023), writing in Lifewire, feels an app designed for note-taking can change how one can get things done. Based on various features, the Apps in her list of choices are:

Understanding Mojo Evernote tops her list and is available for iOS and Android devices. The app lets one organise notes into notebooks. A free account can avail 60MB and be synced across two devices; additional space and device syncing must be paid for. It can clip webpages and images, search for text inside images, and share and work on notes. Screenshot of Evernote website https://evernote.com/ Simplenote: This notes app works with iOS, Android, and other platforms and devices. It has a simple interface and basic organisational features such as tags and search. Users can collaborate with others, and notes are synced across their accounts. Screenshot of Simplenote website https://simplenote.com/ Google Keep is an iOS and Android app with a Chrome browser version. Notes are displayed as cards; users can colour-code them and add other attributes to help them find and share notes. Notes can be synced across platforms. Users can also set time--and location-based reminders with a voice memo feature for audio notes.
154 Screenshot of Google Keep website https://www.google.com/keep/

Besides the above, Moreau picks up Microsoft's OneNote, an iOS and Android Apps for Mojo app; Notebook, an IOS and Android app; Drop Box Paper Squid, an Android app for taking down handwritten notes; and iOS apps Bear, Notes and Notability.
9.7 COLLABORATION AND
COMMUNICATION APPS
Pot (2023) believes that team chat apps aren't just tools but are modern offices for remote teams that share a physical workspace. These apps also allow everybody in a team or a company to participate and see relevant conversations. After testing them, the apps selected have been picked on features like how they organise conversations, offer universal search with filtering features, offer video and audio chats, have easy navigation and control, and enable collaboration. Best of the apps, according to Pot, are: Slack: Available for iOS and Android, Slack has a general channel for the entire company and specific channels for specific teams or projects. Conversations in channels can be broken down into threads, with users notified if they are participants or subscribers. Team members can tag others and pull them into channels or threads based on team or project needs. It has both free and paid plans. Screenshot of Slack website https://slack.com/intl/en-in/ Microsoft Teams is available on both iOS and Android. The app is included with Microsoft 365 and is tightly integrated into the Microsoft ecosystem with the best audio and video quality, though with a cluttered user interface per Pot. Screenshot of Microsoft Teams website https://www.microsoft.com/en-in/ microsoft-teams/group-chat-software.

Understanding Mojo Google Chat is available on iOS and Android, and it was earlier called Google Hangouts Chat. Like Slack, it breaks conversations into chat rooms, similar to Slack's channels. Conversations are then forced into threads, helping things organise. As per Pot, this is included with Google Workspace, which has a great search feature but has the limitation of a limited feature set. Screenshot of Google Chat website https://workspace.google.com/products/ chat/ Besides the above, there are apps like Discord (https://discord.com/) for both iOS and Android, which was originally built with gamers in mind, though currently marketed to online communities, and iOS and Android compatible Element (https://element.io/), which has a fully encrypted messaging built on an open source protocol.
9.8 AUGMENTED REALITY (AR) AND
VIRTUAL REALITY (VR) APPS
In "Tom's Guide," Grannell says that augmented reality has arrived on smartphones, as today's handsets feature more powerful processors and cameras capable of superimposing immersive graphics on smartphone screens. He details the smartphone and its features, which support AR. He writes about the Galaxy S20 Ultra featuring a time-of-flight sensor offering support to AR apps or the iPhone 12 Pro, iPhone 12 Pro Max, and iPhone 13 with a LiDAR sensor to support a stable and powerful AR environment. Some of the best apps according to him which are free for both iOS and Android mobiles are "Just a Line" (https://experiments.withgoogle.com/justaline) which lets you make simple drawings in augmented reality, then share your creation with a short video; "Google Lens" (https://lens.google/) which enables one use one's mobile camera or an image to search the web, translate text, find homework help, identify plants and animals etc.; "Google Maps" (https://maps. google.com/) features an AR mode that helps one navigate by adding virtual signs and directional arrows over the live view on one's phone in order to point the way; "Mission to Mars AR" gives one a glimpse of what it might be like to be there; "Civilisations AR" to brings more than 30 different artifacts from across the many epochs and great civilisations of the world; "Quiver", an augmented reality coloring book app for children; "SketchAR" turns a smartphone screen into an AR drawing aid, overlaying a sketch or line art image on a blank piece

of paper that one can then trace over or use as the basis of one's own sketch; Apps for Mojo "Mondly's AR" features engages language learners with an animated chatbot as well as visualisations of objects and words as well as providing instant feedback on pronunciation and errors; "YouCam Makeup" is an AR-assisted selfie camera that doubles up as a makeup and fashion assistant, letting one preview a range of beauty products . Besides these apps, there are others with varied AR features.
Screenshot of YouCam Makeup app on Apple Store
9.9 LOCATION AND NAVIGATION APPS
Zahradnik (2023) writes about the best apps for iPhone in Lifewire. According to him, apps for iOS fall into two categories: ones where maps are accessed on the fly and ones who download maps. Some of these apps are: * Google Maps: This also has an Android version. In this app, traffic is powered by Waze, which Google owns. It calculates a way around traffic problems. * Apple Maps: Some features include a 3D look-around, effective lane guidance, a speed limit display, and a navigation screen free of distractions. * Other apps include "TomTom GO Navigation" app based on accurate, real- time traffic information; "Waze" (owned by Google) is the world's largest community-based traffic and navigation app; and "Gaia GPS" which started as a backpacking app and has expanded to include all types of outdoor recreational activities. * Among the best navigational apps on the Android platform besides Google Maps and Waze are "OsmAnd Map" GPS Offline", which offers an offline GPS service for many different vehicles and on-foot navigation; "Sygic GPS Navigation & Maps"; "Circuit Route Planner"; "Petal Maps" - GPS & Navigation; "GO Navigation" etc. (Bradbury, 2023)
9.10 SECURITY AND ENCRYPTION APPS
The above sections give an overview of the numerous mobile apps. If so much work is being done using mobiles, it is imperative that the work and the device used to do that work be secure from all kinds of threats. Glamoslija (2023) lists out free iPhone antivirus apps to protect iPhones. iPhones use a security

Understanding Mojo mechanism called "sandboxing", which prevents apps from making changes to other apps, files or processes in an iPhone. Hence, iOS antivirus apps don't provide traditional antivirus scanning. These antivirus apps do things like anti- phishing, scam SMS message protection, and Wi-Fi network scanning. Some free antivirus apps on her list are Norton Mobile Security, Total AV Mobile Security, McAfee Mobile Security for iOS, Bit Defender Mobile Security, and Panda Dome for iOS. Fisher (2023) lists four free antivirus apps for Android phones. In the case of Android, an antivirus app can clean up viruses, Trojans, malicious URLs, infected SD cards, and other mobile malware and protect from threats like spyware or improper app permissions. However, most free apps have limited functionality. Android apps include Bitdefender Antivirus, Malwarebytes Mobile Security, Avira Security Antivirus, and AVG AntiVirus. Among the paid apps, Norton Mobile Security, Lookout Security & Antivirus, McAfee Mobile Security, and Kaspersky Antivirus are available for mobiles. Besides antivirus apps to protect the mobile from viruses, malware, anti- phishing, and other threats, encrypted messaging apps prevent others from snooping on conversations. Spadafora (2023) writes that Apple's iMessage protocol also uses end-to-end encryption, but its Messages app, which is used to view encrypted messages, also handles unencrypted SMS text messages. Per Spadafora, one good end-to-end encryption message app is Signal, people's best-encrypted messaging app. Other apps are Telegram, WhatsApp, Threema, and Wire. All these apps are available for both iOS and Android phones. Besides messaging encryption, encryption apps are available for Emails, VPNs, and Password Managers, as well as for files and storage. Besides these, some apps encrypt the whole iPhone. Let's quickly summarise them here. Lord (2020), in the "Digital Guardian" blog, lists some encrypted Email apps like "ProtonMail" for both iOS and Android, "Virtru" for iOS, "OpenKeychain" and "CipherMail" for Android. Among Virtual Private Networks (VPN), it lists "Hotspot Shield", "Betternet", and "SurfEasy" for iOS and Android. Under Encrypted Password Managers, it lists "LastPass" and "Keeper", available for iOS and Android. File Encryption and Encrypted Storage Apps are "CoverMe", an iOS and Android app which provides an encrypted "vault" for secure file storage as well as end-to-end encrypted messaging and calling and "Secret Space" for Android, which is text/file encryption and password storage app. Waqas (2023) writes that there is a common misconception that device encryption is enough to prevent hackers from compromising online security. In addition to using the iPhone device encryption, several apps to encrypt various applications are used. He goes on to subdivide and list these apps. * Internet Encryption Apps: As personal data on iPhones is encrypted by default, one needs to use private browsers like TOR, Brave, DuckDuckGo, etc., and private search engines like DuckDuckGo, Qwant, and Startpage to keep searches private. Private search engines and browsers may hide one's IP address, but ISPs can still track it. Here, he suggests VPNs like
158 NordVPN App, Surfshark, and CyberGhost.

* Encryption Apps for Calls and Messages, which we discussed earlier in Apps for Mojo this section. * Encrypted email apps, which we discussed earlier in this section, are also included. * Encryption apps for files and folders: He feels iPhone users should also encrypt their data by encrypting the files and folders. He feels this is important because if malware or hackers can compromise the phone, these will be the first things they would compromise. Hence, it is crucial to encrypt files and folders to boost device security. There are also various free and paid apps on the iOS store like "Folder Lock", which password- protects files, images, videos, documents, contacts, wallet cards, audio recordings, and notes; "Sookasa", an encryption app to protect files on cloud services and "IKnox", a paid app for encryption. * Password Manager apps, which we discussed earlier. Finally, besides all the various categories of apps used by MoJo, Green (2019) adds another dimension to the role of MoJo and media houses today of making the news stories social media ready as the production of content for the social media takes a different format and style with each social media channel having its nuances. This is important as social media is a major source of information for the newer generation of news consumers. He writes, "The micro-storytelling format is grasped and digested quickly, so you don't want to have a production time of several hours when it's viewed in a few seconds." Even though many of the apps listed above in various categories help produce content for social media, Green has quoted examples of his own for social media storytelling. "Canva", a premium free graphic design app available on both iOS and Android platforms, is used for creating collages, combining videos with still images for Instagram Stories and infographics; "Storyboard" (only available on Android) which transforms video clips into images resembling a graphic novel which can be added with speech bubbles using the "Snapseed" app (available on iOS and Android), to help create a narrative and present a story in a new and engaging way; "PicPlayPost" an iOS and Android app which allows for the presenting of different images or video at the same time in different panels; "Stop Motion Studio" an animation app providing more possibilities on social media and "ThingLink" an Interactive graphic app which allows one to add multimedia buttons to a still image to bring up additional text, pictures or video. All are making for engaging content on social media channels. Check Your Progress: 2 Notes: 1) Use the space below for your answer.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. What is the importance of note-taking and organisation apps?

Understanding Mojo 2. Why is it important for MoJo's to curate news stories for social media? Give examples of some apps which help them do so.

9.11 LET'S SUM UP
We have discussed the landscape of journalism that has undergone significant transformations owing to advancements in news technology. Mobile Journalism, or MoJo, stands as a cornerstone, leveraging the capabilities of mobile phones and the diverse range of tools accompanying them for news reporting. These tools empower journalists with the ability to record interviews, capture photographs and footage of events, and craft multimedia news stories, all from the convenience of their handheld devices. Notably, an array of applications facilitate various aspects of the journalistic process. You have learnt in this Unit about the capture and Recording Apps, including Filmic, MAVIS, and MoviePro, offer functionalities tailored to capture high- quality audiovisual content, essential for immersive storytelling. Similarly, apps like MuseCam, VSCO, and Halide Mark II enable journalists to generate engaging content tailored for social media and other digital platforms, fostering broader audience engagement. This Unit also covered the realm of post-production, Editing and Post-Production Apps such as PowerDirector 365, Adobe Premiere Rush, and LumaFusion equip journalists with the tools necessary to refine their storytelling craft, allowing for seamless editing and enhancement of multimedia content. Furthermore, Live Streaming Apps like Larix Broadcaster, nanoStream, and Wirecast Go facilitate real-time dissemination of news events, fostering immediacy and interactivity in journalism. Social Media and Content Distribution Apps play a pivotal role in amplifying the reach and impact of journalistic endeavors. Platforms like Qu Promote, Slofile, and HARO cater to niche media channels, while Google Adswhere, Facebook Ads, and Bing Ads serve as essential tools for targeted content distribution across paid media platforms, thereby enhancing the visibility of news stories. We have discussed additionally, Collaboration and Communication Apps such as Slack, Microsoft Teams, and Google Chat streamline teamwork and coordination among journalists, fostering a collaborative environment conducive to efficient news production. Augmented Reality (AR) apps like Just a Line, Google Lens, and YouCam Makeup offer innovative storytelling opportunities, enriching the immersive experience for audiences. Moreover, Location and Navigation Apps like Google Maps and Apple Maps facilitate on-the-ground reporting by providing journalists with reliable navigation and geolocation services. Notably, the security mechanisms inherent in different mobile operating systems, such as iOS's "sandboxing" feature, significantly impact the efficacy of antivirus apps in safeguarding mobile 160 devices from malicious threats.

For instance, while iOS antivirus apps are constrained in their capabilities due Apps for Mojo to sandboxing restrictions, Android antivirus apps like Bitdefender Antivirus,
Malwarebytes Mobile Security, Avira Security Antivirus, and AVG AntiVirus
offer robust protection against a myriad of mobile threats, ranging from viruses and Trojans to spyware and phishing attempts. Furthermore, encryption apps play a crucial role in ensuring the confidentiality and integrity of journalistic communications. Whether it's encrypted messaging apps for secure conversations or encryption tools for emails, VPNs, password managers, and file storage, these applications safeguard sensitive information from unauthorized access, bolstering the overall cybersecurity posture of journalists and media organizations. In conclusion, in light of these technological advancements, the role of MoJo and media houses extends beyond traditional news reporting, encompassing the dynamic landscape of social media. Crafting news stories for social media demands a nuanced understanding of each platform's format and style, underscoring the evolving nature of journalism in the digital age.
9.12 KEYWORDS
Adaptive Bitrate Streaming: Different streams with varying bitrates are served to users based on the strength of their internet connections. So, a user who has a stronger internet connection will be given a higher-quality version of a live stream than someone with a weaker connection. To do this, the video player detects any fluctuations in internet connections and processing capacity, then automatically upgrades or downgrades the stream's bitrate. The user sees a smooth, great-looking live-streaming video. This particularly helps with the stream-watching experience for mobile users who are on the move. Focus peaking, also called peaking highlights, is a real-time focus mode that uses the camera's Live View focusing aid to highlight peak contrast areas with a false-colour overlay in the viewfinder. This can help determine what part of the image is in focus before shooting. HLS protocol: HLS stands for "HTTP Live Streaming," which is how visual and audio media is delivered over the Internet quickly and reliably. It also works with HTML5 video players. HTML5 video player: This is currently the most customisable and compatible video player on the market, having replaced Adobe's Flash player. LiDAR sensor: LiDAR, which stands for Light Detection and Ranging, is a popular remote surveying method used to measure the exact distance of an object on the earth's surface. Log gamma curve recording helps increase the tonal range of footage in post-production. Cinematographers also shoot in logs to get the very last details. Multi-Bitrate Streaming or Transcoding: The live streaming app must first

Understanding Mojo create a stream in multiple bitrates to offer adaptive bitrate streaming. This is done by built-in automatic transcoding, which allows content to be pushed to audiences at various bitrates. The apps help serve the format best suited for the users without extra work. While adaptive bitrate streaming automatically adjusts the bitrate by continuously detecting all the changes to speed, multi-bitrate streaming helps publish videos with multiple bitrates for users to choose from. Multistreaming: Live streaming apps designed to let content go live on multiple websites simultaneously. RTMP: Real-Time Messaging Protocol is the most widely used video platform for broadcasting live video online. RTSP: Real Time Streaming Protocol is an application-level network protocol designed for multiplexing and packetising multimedia transport streams over a suitable transport protocol. It is used in entertainment and communications systems to control streaming media servers. Latency refers to the time between an action or command being input into a system and the action being carried out. It's the time between pressing a key on a keyboard and seeing the computer respond. Time-of-flight sensor: A time-of-flight camera, also known as a time-of- flight sensor, is a range imaging camera system for measuring distances between the camera and the subject for each point of the image based on the round-trip time of an artificial light signal, such as a laser or an LED. VPN: A Virtual Private Network creates a secure connection between a computing device and a computer network or between two networks using an insecure communication medium such as the public Internet. Zebra stripes from exposure warnings are a common highlight warning indicator in video cameras. They do not control exposure but warn you that your highlights are blown out and not recorded in the image. The function overlays some stripes into the image that indicate exposure levels, aiding exposure by showing a striped pattern over areas close to overexposure.
9.13 FURTHER READINGS
1. Bradbury, J. (2023, March 16). Ten best navigation and map apps on
Android 2023. https://www.androidpolice.com/navigation-and-map- apps/#waze-navigation-amp-live-traffic
2. Duhamel, H. ( 2023, September 21). The 20+ Best Live Streaming Apps
for Mobile Broadcasting [2023 Update]. https://www.dacast.com/blog/ best-live-video-streaming-apps-mobile/
3. Fisher, T. (2023, September 4). 4 Best Free Antivirus Apps for Android
Phones. https://www.lifewire.com/best-free-antivirus-android-4151993.4. Fox, A. (2021, December 22). The 8 Best Video Recording Apps for

iPhone and Android. https://www.lifewire.com/best-video-recording- Apps for Mojo apps-for-iphone-and-android-4176172
5. Grannell, C. (2023, September 6) Best video editing apps in 2023. https://
www.techradar.com/best/best-video-editing-apps
6. Green, D. (2019, June 11) Six must-have apps for mobile journalists.
https://www.journalism.co.uk/news/six-must-have-apps-for-mobile- journalism/s2/a740099/
7. Grannell, C. (2021, April 14). Best AR apps in 2021: Augmented reality
comes to your phone.
8. https://www.tomsguide.com/round-up/best-ar-apps
9. Glamoslija, K. (2023, December 7). 10 Best (REALLY FREE) iPad &
iPhone Antivirus Apps in 2023. https://www.safetydetectives.com/blog/ best-really-free-antivirus-for-ios/
10. Lord, N. (2020, August 6). 15 Free Mobile Encryption Apps to Protect
Your Digital Privacy. https://www.digitalguardian.com/blog/15-free- mobile-encryption-apps-protect-your-digital-privacy
11. Moreau, E. (2023, February 7). The 10 Best Note-Taking Apps of 2023.
https://www.lifewire.com/best-note-taking-apps-4136590
12. Pot, J. (2023, June 9) The five best team chat apps for business in 2023.
https://zapier.com/blog/best-team-chat-app/
13. Read, A. (2022, July 26). 24 Best Social Media Apps to Help You Create
Epic Social Media Content. https://buffer.com/resources/social-media-
apps/
14. Smith, K.B. (2019, November 4). 9 Must-Have Apps for Mobile
Journalists. https://www.switcherstudio.com/blog/9-must-have-apps- and-tools-for-mobile-journalists
15. Spadafora, A. (2023, May 11). The best-encrypted messaging apps in
2023. https://www.tomsguide.com/reference/best-encrypted-messaging-
apps
16. Waqas, I. (2023, August 9). 15 Encryption Apps For iPhone That Encrypt
The Entire Phone in 2023. https://beencrypted.com/encryption/guide/ encryption-apps-for-iphone/
17. Wilpert, C.V, (2023, October 25). 48 Best Content Distribution Platforms
(The Complete List). https://contentmavericks.com/content-distribution/ platforms/
18. Zahradnik, F.( 2023, January 5). The 5 Best GPS Apps for iPhone of
2023. https://www.lifewire.com/iphone-gps-navigation-apps-1683498
9.14 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1

Understanding Mojo 1. For editing and post-production, apps like Adobe Premiere Rush and LumaFusion offer features equivalent to standalone digital cameras. These apps allow users to adjust color grading, apply filters, add transitions, and incorporate multiple layers of audio and video. For instance, Adobe Premiere Rush provides intuitive editing tools and supports multi-track timelines, akin to professional editing software. LumaFusion, on the other hand, offers advanced features like keyframing and support for external hardware accessories, enabling intricate editing processes similar to those on desktop platforms.
2. Essential features of live streaming apps for Mobile Journalists (MoJos)
include stability, ease of use, and interactivity. Apps like Facebook Live, Periscope, and Streamlabs offer real-time engagement with audiences through comments and reactions. They also support high-quality streaming, integration with social media platforms, and the ability to switch between multiple camera angles, enhancing the storytelling capabilities of MoJos on-the-go. Check Your Progress: 2
1. The importance of note-taking and organization apps lies in their ability
to enhance productivity and streamline information management. These apps facilitate the systematic recording of ideas, tasks, and important details, thereby aiding in effective planning and execution. By providing features like categorization, searchability, and synchronization across devices, they empower users to stay organized and retrieve information effortlessly. Moreover, note-taking apps enable users to capture insights on-the-go, fostering creativity and preventing valuable thoughts from being forgotten. In educational contexts, these apps are invaluable for students in organizing lecture notes, research findings, and study materials. Overall, note-taking and organization apps serve as indispensable tools in today's fast-paced digital world, helping individuals manage information overload and achieve their goals efficiently.
2. It's crucial for Mobile Journalists (MoJos) to curate news stories for social
media to engage and inform their audience effectively. By selecting and presenting relevant news content in a concise and visually appealing manner, MoJos can capture the attention of social media users amidst the abundance of information. Curating news stories also allows MoJos to tailor content to fit the preferences and interests of their target audience, thereby increasing engagement and interaction. Examples of apps that aid in news curation for social media include Flipboard, which aggregates news articles based on user interests, and Buffer, which helps schedule and publish curated content across various social media platforms. Additionally, tools like Canva and Adobe Spark enable MoJos to create eye-catching visuals to accompany their curated news stories, enhancing their appeal and shareability on social media platforms.

UNIT 10 MOBILE JOURNALISM
EQUIPMENT
Structure
10.0 Introduction
10.1 Learning Outcomes
10.2 Essential Tools for Mobile Journalism
10.2.1 In-depth Exploration of Mobile Devices (Smartphones, Tablets) and Their
Capabilities
10.2.2 Introduction to Essential Accessories: Microphones, Tripods, Stabilisers,
and Lighting
10.3 Mobile Editing Applications
10.3.1 Mobile Editing Apps for Video, Audio, and Photo Content
10.3.2 Workflow Optimisation for Efficient Editing On the Go
10.4 Live Streaming with Mobile Devices
10.4.1 Understanding the Principles of Live Streaming Using Mobile Devices
10.4.2 Exploring Live Streaming Platforms and Best Practices for Engaging
Content
10.5 Advanced Mobile Journalism Equipment
10.5.1 Specialised Tools for Mojo, Such As External Lenses and Portable Audio
Recorders
10.5.2 Evaluating the Benefits and Limitations of Advanced Equipment
10.6 Let Us Sum Up
10.7 Keywords
10.8 Further Readings
10.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
10.0 INTRODUCTION
Mobile phones are not only our way of news consumption but also our mode of news production. By now, you are well versed with the term "mojo", which is a portmanteau of "mobile" and "journalism". Mojo is no longer a new revolution but rather an established practice in news broadcasting. It is a way of reporting stories using only a mobile phone, where the reporter shoots, edits and files the story rapidly from the field. A lot of the news you consume daily through digital devices is produced on smartphones using minimal equipment. This is against the traditional method, where journalists must carry bulky cameras and accessories. While mojo has been around for some time now, people need to be aware of its enormous possibilities. Proper training and context are required for journalists

Understanding Mojo to tap the complete potential of mobile journalism, and they need to hone their skills to tell their stories effectively through this medium. As we learnt about the basics of mobile journalism in previous units, this Unit will focus on the tools and techniques required for practising mojo.
10.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Understand the basic equipment required for mojo; * Know the mobile editing applications and their use; * Comprehend live streaming with mobile devices and * Gain an insight into the advanced mojo equipment.
10.2 ESSENTIAL TOOLS FOR MOBILE
JOURNALISM
As a mobile journalist, you must understand the toolkit that enables you to create news stories on the go. Knowing the right technology to use at the right moment is crucial to realising its benefits. Whatever type of work you are involved in as a mobile journalist, you cannot deny the significance of mobile tools in all forms of communication.
10.2.1 In-depth Exploration of Mobile Devices (Smartphones,
tablets) and Their Capabilities The essential tools that a mobile journalist needs to keep handy have been presented below:
1. Smartphone
The first and foremost thing you need to pursue mobile journalism is a mobile phone with a camera. Any smartphone that offers ample storage space would be appropriate. However, the journalist should ensure the mobile phone can shoot in difficult light conditions and run good cameras and multi-layered video apps to get optimum results. For mojo work, there are two best-suited platforms: Android and Apple'siOS. The reasons to choose one over the other may vary based on your preferences. Advantages of Android: Customizability: Android smartphones offer a high degree of customizability at a relatively lower price range. They are more user-friendly and offer various choices concerning their layout and feel. Expandable storage: While the phone may have considerable in-built storage space to accommodate all your needs, you can expand it using micro SD cards. Cloud storage is another viable option for fulfilling storage needs. Many solutions, such as Google Drive or OneDrive, which can be seamlessly integrated with the Android ecosystem, are available.

More flexibility: Syncing Android phones with a Windows computer is far Mobile Journalism easier. Several file transfer methods, such as USB cable, Bluetooth, or cloud Equipment storage devices, are available. Higher affordability: Pricing is an important advantage of Android phones, as they are usually priced lower than their Apple iOS counterparts. Barring a few on the higher end of the spectrum, you can easily find a great Android phone with desirable features within your budget. Easier file management: The Android operating system makes managing files and folders smoother and easier. Like managing them on a PC, you can easily view, organise, save, share, and transfer your files quickly and efficiently on an Android phone. Advantages of Apple's iOS: While iOS phones have historically been expensive, their benefits make them worth the investment. These devices are feasible for mobile journalists who want to get the best output with minimal effort. Better Security and Privacy: The close-walled Apple ecosystem(where only Apple devices are compatible with each other, and when devices, users, manufacturers and app developers all belong to the same ecosystem) enables a more secure environment and guarantees a higher level of user safety. Better Performance: The processors in an iOS phone are known to make it a better performer than most Android phones, with faster and more fluid operations. The user interface of an iOS is quite simple, with fewer complications and straightforward settings. Better Support: Apple offers superior tech support for hardware and software- related issues. While the services may appear expensive, the quality of support is worth it. The local retail stores offer the best possible service to their customers. Offers best apps first: There is no denying the fact that the best app developers favour iOS phones. Most apps are launched first on Apple's App Store, much earlier than they go to Google Play Store. Lesser pre-installed apps: The iPhone has fewer pre-installed apps, thus making the device deliver better. While this list may not be exhaustive, it provides a basic overview of the two popular operating systems in the context of mojo work. A journalist may consider these when choosing a smartphone for news production. In a nutshell, a mobile journalist should consider the following features when choosing a smartphone: * Choose a phone that is compatible with your technical expertise * A phone that is sturdy and works fast * It can be easily integrated with various apps, formats and workflows

Understanding Mojo * A phone capable of running high-end apps to enable broadcast functionality * Can support apps to edit your stories quickly with finesse * Supports microSD card * Can easily transfer content to and from other devices * It has a long-lasting battery Some mobile phones even have different camera lens functions like wide, ultra- wide, telephoto, and macro lenses, which come in handy when changing the frame from one shot to another quickly without much effort. AI is also being integrated into smartphone cameras and large image sensors, enabling them to capture great photographs and videos even in poor light conditions. Durability is also increasing, as many of the latest generation phones are water-proof and dust-resistant, making them endure harsh environmental conditions.
2. Tablet
Though a tablet is less compact and lightweight than a smartphone, it is still a versatile and viable device for mojo work. Journalists may have several advantages while using a tablet to produce their stories. Some of them are: Larger screens: Tablets have a screen size that is more significant than a mobile phone and smaller than a laptop or PC. The relatively large display means you don't have to look through a tiny lens to focus on your subjects; you can see them crisply fit onto the screen. This allows you to check the output freely and more clearly. The functions are quicker and simpler on the interface of a tablet. It also allows multi-tasking as you can launch and switch apps on the fly. You can drag and drop, enter split-screen mode and swipe up to go home with a tablet, making multi-tasking more powerful and intuitive. Built-in keyboards: The keyboard in a tablet makes it as good as a laptop, which is not the case with mobile phones. Typing becomes much easier and faster with a tablet, giving you a laptop-like experience on a much more compact device. Access to a wider range of apps: Many apps are optimised for large-screen devices, making them more compatible with tablets. Such apps run better on tablets owing to more responsive layouts, multi-window support, continuity across screen size, and device orientation changes.
3. iPad
Apple designed and manufactured the iPad, a touchscreen tablet PC that is more compact and lightweight than a laptop. It is extremely versatile and suitable for performing a wide variety of tasks. It can effortlessly run the most powerful apps. With an iPad, you can easily work on multiple apps simultaneously and switch between them. Another important feature of an iPad is the Apple pencil. It can be used to draw anything and make handy notes. Moreover, it can also convert handwritten notes to typed text, which is a very useful function for mojo work.

10.2.2 Introduction to Essential Accessories: Microphones, Mobile Journalism
Equipment
Tripods, Stabilisers, and Lighting
Microphones Recording premium-quality dynamic audio is crucial to developing compelling video stories. A great video can be easily ruined with poor-quality audio, and until the audio is clean, the story will remain unimpressive. While working solo as a mobile journalist, you must know the tips and tricks for recording audio on your smartphone. You have to do all the work single- handedly without a sound recordist, so proper training is required to understand various sound principles. Whether recording a bite, interviewing sources, or capturing natural sound on tape, you cannot afford to mess with your audio. Moreover, audio strongly affects the story's emotion, thus promising better audience engagement. The first consideration is choosing the right microphone. While things are very much in control, and you are close enough to the source, with no background noise, the microphone of your device (smartphone or tablet) might fit the bill. However, that is only the case sometimes. There might be situations where you need an external microphone to achieve enhanced sound quality. Some key factors to consider when picking up the right microphone to meet your needs are:
1. Directionality
2. Connectivity
3. Budget
Directionality The ability of a microphone to pick up sound from a particular direction is its directionality. The microphones may have directional properties depending on which direction they will capture sound from while rejecting unwanted ones coming from other directions. Based on their directionality, the microphones can be classified into the following categories: * Omni-directional: This type of microphone picks up sounds uniformly from all directions. It works almost the same whether pointed towards a source or away from it, provided the distances are equal. It captures the desirable sound as well as the undesired noise in the same way. These mics may be used to record from multiple sources, where they can be placed on a table or used as neck mics for individuals. * Directional: These microphones are designed to respond best to audio coming from a specific direction, say, for example, front (and rear in the case of bidirectionals), while rejecting those from sides and rear. This makes them an ideal choice for recording in noisy environments. The directional microphones can be categorised as: >> Cardioid: These mics have a narrower pick-up pattern and are often used in handheld microphones. They are also found on video cameras

Understanding Mojo used by news and documentary makers, offering great possibilities for mobile journalists. >> Super cardioid: These are quite similar to cardioid but with a narrower angle of sensitivity. This feature makes them more focused, thus finding applications in live stage shows and similar events where spoken word is significant. However, they are very sensitive to wind and handling sounds, which needs to be taken care of.
Ivo Burum
Connectivity Another feature of your mic you would like to consider is the connectivity. A mic should have the right inputs for your devices, such as USB or XLR. Using a microphone with the right connectivity for your devices is important to ensure seamless integration and high-quality audio recording. Budget: Needless to say, the budget is an important deciding factor when choosing your mic. You should always research and choose the microphone that best suits your budget. A wide range of products are available at different price points based on specifications. Microphones can also be categorised according to their design and usage: * Shotgun * Lavalier * Handheld * Wireless Shotgun: These can be called "high-directionality microphones" as they are more directional than a typical cardioid or super-cardioid mic. These can pick up the sound from the desired source where the mic is pointed, located some distance away. Shotgun microphones are appropriate for covering an unfolding story, as reporters usually work close to the subject they cover. They are also preferable for voice-overs, especially when a non-reverberant vocal booth is unavailable. Some popular shotgun mics are the Sennheiser MKE 400, Rode Video Micro, Rode Video Mic NTG, and Sennheiser MKE 200. Lavalier Mic: Also called 'lapel' mics, these microphones are a great choice for a lower budget. Lavalier mics can be easily attached to a person's lapel, somewhere close to the mouth (6-8 inches away). They have an omnidirectional pattern and can also be placed on the table between two people sitting across

and talking, as in the case of one-on-one interviews. These microphones are Mobile Journalism available in both wired and wireless configurations. The prices generally Equipment vary depending on the size of the mic. Some preferred lapel mics are Rode SmartLav+, Sony ECM77B, Sennheiser ME 2-II and BOYA by M1. Handheld Microphone: Handheld mics are a smart choice to lend a new touch to your story. Very sturdy and rugged devices are called 'stick microphones'. Handheld mics are quite durable and can endure harsh working conditions. These can be used for recording interviews, putting pieces on camera in a news story, and also for the natural sound on tape. Covering the mic with a windshield is advisable to avoid wind noise. Handheld mics can be used even in noisy location news reporting, pivoting them between the reporter and the source. Handheld mics are available both wired and 'wireless'. Wireless Mic: A cordless microphone is a professional mic suited for mojo work. Highly flexible, these consist of a receiver that attaches to your phone and a transmitter microphone. You can record interviews and sound bites from a distance without much hassle and avoid the risk of tripping over a cord or cable. Wireless microphones can do a fabulous job where the talent is on the move, like in a presentation or walk-the-talk interview.
Tripods and Stabilisers
Most latest smartphones have an in-built optical image stabilisation system to steady videos. Yet, it is necessary to invest in a good stabilising accessory that may provide stability to your smartphone and prevent a shaky video. Cradles Cradles serve as structures to hold your mojo camera devices, providing the much-needed balance while working handheld. They can also offer attachment points for your smartphones, microphones, lights, and stabilisers. Their ergonomic design enhances efficiency and comfort while taking pictures and shooting videos. Some fit neatly on full-size tripods and can be attached with remotes to record tricky pictures and videos. Tripods It is ideal for carrying a compact, lightweight, and customisable tripod. Besides the traditional tripod, numerous versions are available in the market, like flexible tripod, tabletop tripod, etc. Some tripods are even highly adjustable, making them applicable in different situations. The Manfrotto Pixi Mini is a popular tripod with a robust build and smooth functioning. It can be easily mounted on surfaces like a car roof, a wall, or a filing cabinet. There are other options with a little more weight and versatile applications, like the Manfrotto 560B1. Gimbals As mobile journalism continues to become more popular, gimbals have emerged as an essential part of the Mojo toolkit. Mobile journalists have developed an affinity for gimbals to cover breaking news stories as they evolve, thanks to the silky-smooth footage obtained with little to no effort. These tools can greatly

Understanding Mojo enhance the video's quality, avoiding jerks and shakes and elevating the output to cinematic grade. Lighting Lighting is an important consideration to achieve quality videos and photos. While the natural light available is quite significant, the benefit of keeping an external light source handy can never be undermined. Despite superior technologies and in-built camera functions in a smartphone, low-light conditions pose a challenge. Being prepared in advance pays off. You can choose from various compact battery-operated lights specifically designed for phones. You should avoid lights that attach through the phone's headphone jack or lightning connector, as it is likely that there will be an external mic already connected there. A shoe-mount light, instead, would be a better bet. Some well-known smartphone light brands are Genaray, Ulanzi and LumeCube. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Classify the different types of microphones according to their directionality.

10.3 MOBILE EDITING APPLICATIONS
10.3.1 Mobile Editing Apps for Video, Audio, and Photo
Content All professionals involved in mojo work use various editing apps and software to create compelling news stories. While many journalists edit using desktop software, there are times when they need to edit on the go. A range of editing apps is available to facilitate filming and editing to create professional-looking videos on your device. These apps allow journalists to package their stories beautifully with video and audio elements, from sliding B-rolls to changing transitions, mixing music, and creating new titles. All this is done, and you can instantly file your story from wherever you are with an internet connection. Some of the video editing apps that are in vogue among mobile journalists have been listed below: * Splice * Magisto * Capcut 172 * Adobe Premiere Rush

* LumaFusion Mobile Journalism Equipment * Filmora * Filmic Pro * InShot * Filmmaker Pro * Vivavideo * Vixer * Kinemaster
* VN
* Alight Motion Audio editing apps: It is vital to edit the audio in your story, whether it is an interview, sound bite, ambient sound, voice-over, or simply any other music. You would be required to trim the beginning and end of interviews and other distractions and noise that you must fix. Some popular audio editing apps, both free and paid, have been listed below: * WaveEditor * WondershareFilmora * AudioLab * WavePad * VoicePRO
* Audio Evolution Mobile Studio
* FL Studio * Adobe Podcast * Dolby On Photo editing apps: * Adobe Lightroom * Afterlight * Snapseed * Adobe Photoshop Camera
* VSCO
* PicsArt * Over * Preview

Understanding Mojo For graphics and other work: Journalists often use graphics to meat up their stories with data visualisations. This enhances the story's credibility, explains things better and makes it more convincing. Graphics also provide other on-screen information to make the content engaging. The news stories must also be shared on various platforms to gain maximum reach and visibility. Some apps may be useful in achieving these objectives: * Canva: An app with numerous customisable templates, extensive design elements, and capacity to support various formats, Canva is almost indispensable for mobile journalists. It has an extremely user-friendly interface with powerful design features, is highly adjustable, and allows for collaborative work effortlessly. * Hootsuite is a social media management tool necessary in the age of social media. It can help journalists manage several social media accounts from one point. Since visibility equates to value, journalists must pitch their stories from various platforms and optimise their social media presence. The editing apps market is flooded with alternatives, and there is high-level competition among different apps. Some of the apps are freely available, while others require a subscription. Usually, the basic versions of most of the apps are free. At the same time, the full suite of features is available on a monthly or annual subscription, which is more suited for professionals and prosumers.
10.3.2 Workflow Optimisation for Efficient Editing on the Go
The first step in optimising your video editing workflow is understanding the process. This includes the stages involved, from capturing footage to the final export. Knowing the steps involved will help you identify areas to streamline and improve the process. Organising your footage, files, and projects is essential to efficient video editing. This includes sorting and labelling your footage, creating a folder structure for your projects, and backing up your files. A well- organised system allows you to easily access the files you need when you need them, saving you time and reducing frustration.
1. Research: Like traditional news reporting, researching the subject is the
key to start working on a story. Acquiring the requisite information is a vital beginning point to understand the workflow and decide what you are looking for and where you need to go. This is a part of pre-production, which helps you save time, energy and other resources and gets you organised.
2. Writing: Good writing skills are always considered an advantage, whether
traditional news reporting or mojo. Being a mojo, you work on quicker deadlines and provide breaking news stories, implying that you must write often and faster. Only the approach may vary, as the writing style may be in sync with the digital mode. The mojo should prepare a blueprint of the story with pictorial depictions and written notes, along with the list of potential sources to interview, shots to be included and the story's overall structure.

3. Shoot and Edit: The next step is simply to point and shoot. This exercise Mobile Journalism
covers the most important element of your story. A good mojo is adept Equipment at shooting and editing "on the fly". Making the most of the tools (apps) available in his arsenal, the mojo uses his smartphone or tablet to capture amazing visuals that tell the story and edit it by trimming shots, adding transitions, inserting text and layering it with appropriate audio. Mastery over the art of shooting and editing right there on the field will give you an edge as a mojo.
4. Geo-tagging:
For a mojo, geo-tagging may be something to put a premium on. It can be quite helpful to validate sources and their locations while recording useful information about where and with whom the interview occurred. It can be a handy way of sorting out the chaos, especially when reporting from crowded or remote locations. Geo-tagging can further the story's credibility, adding an extra layer of verification while increasing depth and accuracy.
5. Storage: Though it may not appear that important, storage assumes huge
importance while doing mojo work. You may likely have laid your hands on some very good stuff, yet during the chaos of reporting, things happen, and things get lost. You do not want this to happen as it may ruin a great story you were about to produce. Therefore, it is always advisable to have a storage solution to store your audio and video content, be it cloud storage or any other.
6. Socialisation: In the age of social media, you certainly want to maximise
the reach and impact of your story. Socialisation is important because it helps you pitch your stories to a larger audience and engage with them. Live streaming, Twitter threads, Instagram posts, Facebook posts, or podcasts are all powerful means of establishing your brand as a journalist. Buffer, Hootsuite, Sprout Social, Sendible, etc., are useful social media management tools for journalists to manage multiple accounts from a single dashboard. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the benefits of using video editing apps for mojo work.

2. Why is geo-tagging important for mojo stories?

10.4 LIVE STREAMING WITH MOBILE
DEVICES
Mobile journalists often find themselves covering breaking news, and one of the best ways is to get into live streaming using their mobile devices. Considering its ease, access, and cost-effectiveness, live streaming with a smartphone has become an all-time favourite. Innumerable people watch events and happenings on their smartphones, and many broadcast live on someone else's mobile device. In such a scenario, the significance of live streaming can simply not be underestimated, and journalists cannot afford to miss the enormous benefits of broadcasting their content live to a huge audience.
10.4.1 Understanding the Principles of Live Streaming Using
Mobile Devices
When live streaming through your smartphone or any other mobile device, there are some principles you need to follow to stream high-quality videos that your audiences enjoy watching.
1. Good lighting: Streaming live means finding the best bet with whatever
lights are available. While some smartphones have nighttime modes to compensate for low-lighting situations, that is not true with most devices. It is also advantageous to carry some light with you. Furthermore, you need to know the techniques (like three-point lighting) that will help you navigate poor lighting conditions.
2. Shots and Camera Angles: Creativity is the key, even when streaming
things live. It would help if you framed your shots to make your video look appealing. The shots and camera angles you choose can be a great way to set the tone of your story and convey a message. Good and appropriate camera shots and angles are necessary for creating appealing content, even when it is being streamed live.
3. Good Internet connection: Connectivity is paramount for a mojo
streaming live or otherwise. Without a good Internet connection, all your plans to stream live will be thwarted. Not only is it consistent, but the connection must also be stable, fast, and secure. Cellular data can also be utilised, but it's the least reliable connection for live streaming. A private Wi-Fi network or hotspot is a better alternative.
4. Stabilise your footage: Too shaky videos are undoubtedly unsightly to
watch. Until the footage is steady, your camera quality, lights, shots, and angles will all be worthless. Shaky videos may result in blur and even appear to be confusing. In-built stabilising options may be helpful, yet you may need to use a mount or stabiliser to ensure a seamless viewing experience for your audience.
5. Audio: External microphones are always preferable; a good mic can
substantially improve your live stream. Strategically, finding a place where you can cut down the background noise is a good idea. It would help if you moved away from anything interfering with your broadcast audio. It is only desirable if the viewers have to refrain from hearing your voice or the 176 sound of the story.

10.4.2 Exploring Live Streaming Platforms and Best Practices Mobile Journalism
Equipment
for Engaging Content
A live streaming platform offers video hosting solutions for users to broadcast their videos to the audience in real time. People get to watch the video while you create it. Various platforms can be utilised to live stream your videos, giving you more control over the content and viewing experience. However, choosing the right platform tailor-made to your needs can take time and effort. You need to know your audience and goals to decide the best platform for your work. While Facebook Live and Instagram Live have gained much currency among amateurs and professionals, the mojo may want a better grip over the stream and make it more organised. These platforms are also regularly upgraded, which constantly need to stay updated about the latest features and services. Some platforms that allow free live streaming are YouTube Live, Facebook Live, LinkedIn Live, X Live, Twitch, and Instagram Live. Others offer a paid plan with a host of benefits. Below is the list of the most popular live-streaming platforms according to their functionality and features:
1. Brightcove
2. Restream
3. IBM Cloud Video
4. Livestream by Vimeo
5. Wowza
6. Diecast
7. Panopto
8. Kaltura
Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. List some of the freely available platforms for live streaming.

2. Discuss why good lighting is important for live streaming.

10.5 ADVANCED MOBILE JOURNALISM
EQUIPMENT
As discussed earlier, a mojo kit may include some other advanced equipment and the regular tools required.
10.5.1 Specialised Tools for Mojo, Such As External Lenses
and Portable Audio Recorders
External Lenses
With advanced technology, smartphone cameras have come of age, integrating the best features and delivering commendable output. Yet, there are instances where they need to perform better. In such cases, it is recommended to utilise external lenses that can augment the clarity and increase zoom capabilities. These simple attachments can amplify the camera performance to a large extent by changing the aspect ratio, extending the field of view, achieving a compressed perspective, or enhancing the overall quality. These lenses can help you get the right shot, particularly spontaneous moments as they unfold. They may be wide-angle, telephoto, fish-eye, or any other type, just like regular lenses with various focal lengths. Kits with multiple lens options are also available. The lenses attach to the smartphone through an external clip or mounting plate. Sometimes, you may also need to attach neutral density filters.
Portable Audio Recorders
A mojo kit is incomplete without a portable audio recorder, essential to lend a professional touch to the videos. These compact devices can be carried along during the shoot, though you must be wary of stocking up the batteries. For day- long mojo work, you should change them frequently. However, some recorders can also run on AC power, making them viable for indoor shoots like meetings and conferences. Some professional portable audio recorders are Zoom H1N, Sony ICD-ux560, Zoom H4n, SONY PCM-D10, etc.
10.5.2 Evaluating the Benefits and Limitations of Advanced
Equipment The lenses may enhance the capabilities of your smartphone camera. External lenses act as boosters for your device, as you can experiment more with shots and perspectives. You can have more control over the footage and explore new dimensions of capturing your subjects and views. Secondary lenses may improve the quality of footage. External lenses can also produce high-resolution images and videos with greater clarity and detail. The lenses' small size makes them ideal for fieldwork. They can easily be tucked away in your pocket or bag without adding much baggage. While this equipment can be very empowering, it can pose certain challenges.

While these are power-packed tools, battery drainage may be an issue while the Mobile Journalism mojo is on the move. Charging may be a problem when reporting from difficult Equipment terrain, crowded spaces, or crisis areas. Even carrying extra batteries would be cumbersome, adding to the bulk and hindering movement. Whether it is the mobile device, that lighting rig, or the audio recorder, all consume power, which is a challenge to tackle. Manual switching of lenses can again be unwieldy, as it may not be feasible while covering quickly unfolding events and instantly evolving stories. While the automatic modes are available on mobile devices, the results are only sometimes very desirable. They often need to improve the quality of photos and videos. When taking photographs with your smartphone using an external lens, it should be noted that the focus and aperture of the photographs may get altered. Thus, the settings need to be adjusted to fix this. Moreover, not all lenses are compatible with every smartphone camera. You need to choose the one that can work in tandem with your mobile device. Check Your Progress: 4 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the benefits as well as challenges of using external lenses.

10.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed the basic equipment a journalist should keep to accomplish his/her work and the features and capacities of smartphones and tablets for news reporting on the go. We also discussed the essential accessories like stabilisers, lighting and microphones. We also learned about the apps available for editing videos, audio, and photos from the field and the platforms available for live-streaming content.
10.7 KEYWORDS
Optical image stabilisation: Denoted by the acronym OIS, it is a mechanical technology that uses a gyroscope to stabilise images and videos by detecting camera movement and adjusting accordingly. It is quite useful when shooting in shaky scenarios or doing handheld work. Operating System: The program installed on a device enables it to run basic programs. Examples include Windows, iOS, and Android. At least one operating system is required for any device to run applications and other basic functions. 179

Understanding Mojo Three-point lighting is the basic technique for creating the lighting plan for any video. It uses three lights of varying intensities placed at different locations to illuminate a subject or a scene: the key light, fill light, and backlight.
10.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Burum, I. (2017). Mojo Workin' - Essential Mobile Journalism Tools.
Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://gijn.org/stories/mojo-workin- essential-mobile-journalism-tools/
2. From the Field: The Mobile Journalist. (2018). Retrieved 20 December
2023 from https://us.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-assets/83042_ book_item_83042.pdf
3. Burum, I., & Quinn, S. (2016). MOJO: The Mobile Journalism Handbook.
Routledge.
4. Burum, I. (2021). The Mojo Handbook Theory to Praxis. Routledge.
5. Burgess, C. (2020, 13 May). Tools for Mobile Journalism: Breaking
Broadcast News from the Scene. Avid. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://www.avid.com/resource-center/tools-for-mobile-journalism_ breaking-broadcast-news-from-the-scene
6. Pedersen, S. (2023). Mobile Journalism: Professional Tips and Gear.
Shure. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://www.shure.com/en-US/ performance-production/louder/mobile-journalism-professional-tips-and- gear-list
7.5 Essential Tools for Mobile Journalism in 2023 (2023, 1 August).
Journalism Web. Retrieved 21 December 2023 from https://www. journalismweb.co.za/5-essential-tools-for-mobile-journalism-in-2023/
8. Mobile Reporting Kit. (2023). Spartan News Room Powered by Michigan
State University School of Journalism. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://news.jrn.msu.edu/
9. Lill, B. (2020, 20 January). Five tips to get started with mobile journalism.
Journalism.co.uk. Retrieved 20 December 2023 from https://www. journalism.co.uk/news-commentary/five-tips-to-get-started-with-mobile- journalism/s6/a750507/
10. Staschen, B., &Vellinga, W. (2018). Mobile Storytelling: A journalist's
guide to the smartphone galaxy (Kindle Edition).
10.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Microphones can be classified as omnidirectional, cardioid, and super-
cardioid based on directionality. Omnidirectional microphones pick up sounds uniformly from all directions in a 360-degree pattern. Cardioid microphones have a narrow pick-up pattern, and super cardioids have an even narrower pattern and are more focused.

Check Your Progress: 2 Mobile Journalism
Equipment
1. The editing apps can simplify the mojo's work by facilitating quick editing
of the video, audio and other story components. The journalist can easily slide B-roll, add transitions, mix music, and create new titles. Following this, the story can be instantly filed from any location with an internet connection.
2. Geo-tagging is a quick way to keep track of sources, interviewees, and
their locations. It simplifies the mojo work, especially when reporting from crowded or remote locations. It can further augment the story's credibility, adding an extra layer of verification while providing depth and accuracy. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Some platforms that allow free live streaming are YouTube Live, Facebook
Live, LinkedIn Live, X Live, Twitch, and Instagram Live.
2. Appropriate lighting is necessary for any live stream, as it greatly affects
the overall result. Poor lighting that is not fixed may result in a completely unflattering video. Thus, an external light may be helpful, while the mojo should explore the best possible camera positions to receive optimum lighting. Check Your Progress: 4
1. External lenses can multiply the quality of the smartphone's photos and
videos. They can allow better shots and perspectives and improve zoom capabilities. Their small size is an advantage, making them ideal for fieldwork. However, switching lenses while on the fly can be difficult. Also, not all lenses are compatible with every mobile device; therefore, you must carefully choose.

BLOCK 3
MOBILE JOURNALISM
PRODUCTION PROCESS

BLOCK 3 INTRODUCTION:
MOBILE JOURNALISM
PRODUCTION PROCESS
Narrating an eye-catching news story involves many processes. Since newsrooms are shrinking thanks to the advent of many mobile-based tools, it is important for you to learn how to package your news story to cater to a wide variety of audiences. In this Block, you will learn the tools and techniques of news packaging with the help of a mobile device.
Unit 11: Reporting With Smartphone, In the evolving landscape of
journalism, the integration of smartphones has reshaped news gathering and dissemination. Once confined to traditional mediums, journalism now embraces the immediacy and versatility of mobile technology. This Unit explores the paradigm shift, examining the intersection of journalism and smartphone reporting. From redefining reporting techniques to navigating ethical considerations, learners delve into the multifaceted realm of Mobile Journalism (MoJo). Through comprehensive modules, students uncover the nuances of smartphone reporting, equipping them with essential skills for navigating the dynamic landscape of contemporary journalism.
Unit 12: Script Writing For Mojo Stories, Mobile Journalism stories have
revolutionised the field of Journalism. They have created a massive shift in working style and conception of news, especially in times of crisis, where it has become challenging to take professional cameras and other equipment to the field. In extreme situations where getting help was complex, Mojo made it possible to cover such areas and situations of high tension. It kept the people updated about public health crises like pandemics. Scripting for Mojo has its benefits and challenges, too. In this Unit, we will learn all about Scripting for Mojo.
Unit 13: Mobile News Packaging, The rise of mobile news technology has
transformed digital journalism, with mobile devices becoming indispensable for content consumption and distribution. This Unit explores the nuances of mobile news, covering content types, packaging techniques, and the evolving role of smartphones in journalism. Students will develop skills in small-screen storytelling, crafting compelling headlines, and leveraging multimedia elements effectively. You will also learn techniques for faster loading times, seamless social media integration, and tailoring content for diverse mobile audiences while emphasising ethical considerations in digital news reporting.
Unit 14: Mobile Editing and Production, In the fast-evolving landscape of
journalism, the rise of mobile journalism necessitates journalists equipped with proficient mobile editing and production skills. This Unit introduces the significance of mobile editing, highlighting its pivotal role in modern media dissemination. With smartphones as comprehensive tools, journalists can seamlessly capture, edit, and share stories with unprecedented efficiency. Mastering mobile editing empowers journalists to maximise the storytelling

potential of their devices, enhancing the impact and reach of their journalistic endeavours. Developing a sense of news is a major part of being an emerging journalist. With mobile devices around you throughout the day and night, it might be easy to experiment with narrating news through multiple media elements. Learning journalism might go beyond the typical classroom setting. We hope you will use the tools and techniques to tell your story to the world, not necessarily as a journalist but as a responsible digital citizen.

UNIT 11 REPORTING WITH
SMARTPHONE
Structure
11.0 Introduction
11.1 Learning Outcomes
11.2 Revisiting Reporting Techniques
11.3 Quasi-Media Making and Mobile Journalism
11.4 Smartphones: A New Way of Doing Journalism
11.4.1 Prerequisites for Smartphone Reporting
11.4.2 Key Features: Pros and Cons
11.4.3 Novelty and Smartphones
11.5 Methods for Mobile Journalism
11.6 Classic Examples of Mojo Stories
11.7 Challenges of Reporting with Smartphones
11.7.1 Constraints
11.7.2 Content
11.7.3 Packaging
11.8 Ethics of Reporting with Smartphones
11.9 Future of Smartphone Reporting
11.10 Let Us Sum Up
11.11 Keyword
11.12 Further Readings
11.13 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
11.0 INTRODUCTION
As we know, journalism is collecting, preparing and distributing news and related feature materials through different media, such as print, electronic and digital media. A few years back, journalism meant holding on to a breaking story for up to a few hours before publishing it, when newspapers were the main medium for delivering news. With the advent of new technologies, the methodology of doing journalism has changed manifold. While journalists have accepted this challenge, news-gathering techniques have become different. As audiences are more interested in faster ways to get news, speed of news delivery has become the priority for contemporary news journalists. With media converging into one device- smartphones- the journalism industry

Mobile Journalism is gradually seeing a revolution in how news is covered. It is rare to find a Production Process journalist who doesn't have a mobile phone. According to the latest published research by internet and technology researcher- Mary Meeker, Indian users/ audiences spend an average of 28 hours on their phones per week. On the contrary, they spend an average of 4 hours and 2 hours on television and print editions, respectively. Also, the report suggests that 62% of smartphone users surf social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter regularly. It won't be wrong to say that the introduction of affordable smartphones and cheap internet services in Indian markets has accelerated the process of news consumption on mobile phones in the past decade. Technology can easily turn most mobile phones or smartphones into portable broadcast tools. Streaming video and audio to the web from a mobile phone is turning all journalists into potential mojos- an abbreviation for mobile journalism, also called smartphone journalism. In the present scenario, we can say that mojo has extended the news-gathering potential of any news organisation because, with a smartphone, one person can stream video and audio, take still photographs and send text from their device with access to a wireless/wi-fi network from any remote location. The news can be text, audio, still, video, or a combination. Reporting from smartphones is a standalone phenomenon that works alone. In this Unit, we shall learn about the various aspects of reporting or journalism using smartphones.
11.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Understanding the latest trends of reporting in journalism; * Know about the characteristics and features of mobile journalism; * Gain insight into the methodology used for reporting with smartphones; and * Learn about the technical know-how of reporting using smartphones.
11.2 REVISITING REPORTING TECHNIQUES
Reporting is the heart and soul of journalism. From collecting facts to processing them to releasing them for audience consumption, journalism has taken a huge leap in the last few years. News reporting is the process of gathering and presenting 'unknown or less-known' issues of public interest, collectively termed as NEWS, to the periphery of the public acquaintance. Reporting facilitates news gathering for the public using media tools. It involves researching and presenting information in newspapers and other mass media. News reporting is based on the subject of its manifestation, called a beat. Every reporter gets a beat, which is the area in which he/she is well-versed and can present the facts smoothly. These beats can be developmental issues; events- city/national/international; arts, fashion, entertainment and glamour; politics; economic affairs; investigative reporting; crime and accident reporting, etc. Until now, you must be clear that reporting based on the nature of its 188 content presentation should be objective, clear and understandable, free from

duplications, well structured, result-oriented and ethical. Reporting with Smartphones The history of journalism is closely associated with the development of technology. The invention of the first printing press by Johan Gutenberg in 1440 gave rise to mass daily publication and, thereby, newspapers. The first weekly newspaper started in Vienna in 1610. The first newspaper in India was published on 29th January 1780 by James Augustus Hicky under the British Raj. Its name was 'The Bengal Gazette', the so-called 'Calcutta General Advertiser' or simply 'Hicky's Gazette'. By the 1880s, the newspaper was a general concept worldwide. After this technology advanced, the first radio broadcast occurred in 1920 in Pittsburgh in the USA, followed by television broadcasting by NBC and CBC- two US TV networks in 1939. In 1959, at the studio of All India Radio, Delhi, the first TV channel started an experimental telecast with a small transmitter and a makeshift studio, adopting the brand Doordarshan Hindi. The advent of new technology has always resulted in change and expansion of reporting techniques. History suggests that changes in reporting tools have transformed how journalists operate and sped up the whole process of news gathering. Compared to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, news travels faster today. This has been possible because smartphone reporting, commonly known as mojo, represents the latest iteration in this evolution. Mojo is providing new reporting opportunities to not just electronic media journalists but also allowing newspapers to compete with television and radio in breaking news about multimedia. The beauty of reporting with smartphones lies in its simplicity and convenience. With minimal training, capturing images and sound with a mobile phone is very easy, and content can be sent to the editor to be put in the public domain within minutes.
11.3 QUASI-MEDIA MAKING AND MOBILE
JOURNALISM
Primarily, the discussions of communication focus either on mass communication and its effects or on interpersonal communication. However, this dichotomy often leaves social media systems out of account, which have become increasingly attractive among users. Many socially vital communication activities utilise social arrangements and setups. Still, they can be characterised neither as mass communication nor person-to-person communication, categorised as 'quasi- mass communication'. In other words, in communication science, mediated quasi-interaction is a concept which talks about a monological interaction between people oriented towards an indefinite range of potential recipients. It involves a fundamental asymmetry between producers and receivers. For example, television, radio, newspapers and even mobile journalism are some forms of mediated quasi-interaction. In a rapidly changing world driven by frequent technological and scientific breakthroughs, the biggest and most significant breakthrough has been the introduction and proliferation of the smartphone in the 21st century. Though the first smartphone can be dated back to the early 1990s, it wasn't until 2007 that they became a major part of our daily lives. Over the years, smartphones have undergone constant changes and improvements with better cameras, faster internet connectivity, longer battery life, more memory, etc. Several applications

Mobile Journalism (apps)were also introduced throughout the journey to make work easy. Putting Production Process all of these together, we get the incredibly powerful tool-Smartphone, that has drastically changed how we live today. As smartphones have become more competent, the world has become more accessible. The way we consume news has also changed with the introduction of the smartphone. One can receive instant updates and news in real-time as the story unfolds. Not only this, but the smartness of our mobile phones also greatly affects how news is produced and reported. Till a few years back, when news broke, the reporter and a camera crew with bulky equipment used to make their way to the field, which resulted in a slight time delay. But today, a journalist with a smartphone can break a story immediately after an incident happens. He can tell the story from the beginning to the end, independently handling every step on their own. The power of a smartphone is huge. It allows a journalist to film, record audio, take photographs, edit video, write stories, connect and post to the web all at one go. It also allows the reporter's mobility, independence, and ability to work on the go, which is called mobile journalism or reporting using a smartphone. Unlike the conventional methods, reporting using smartphones is more affordable, flexible, empowering, discreet, friendlier and safer, all of which we will discuss in detail later in the Unit. Amidst all technological advancements and their implications, reporting using smartphones is still journalism. Technological changes have changed how news is reported, but journalism's basic rules and foundation remain the same. A Professional journalist develops new professional practices, adapt to new technologies and innovate during the journey of their careers. It is rare to find a journalist who doesn't have a smartphone. Moreover, free software can easily turn a smartphone into a portable broadcast tool, which makes it relatively easy to stream video and audio to the web. This extends the news-gathering potential of any news organisation as with a smartphone, one person can perform the comprehensive task of capturing a still image, a video, or audio, editing it with text and streaming it online with the help of an internet connection. Also, the convergence of technology, fast broadband and wireless networks and booming interest in citizen involvement in how news is covered gives an edge to journalism practices in India. However, it does not mean that all citizens can become journalists as reporting demands some expertise; citizen journalism has widened the boundaries of news gathering. Meanwhile, it is important to note that many Asian people can access mobile phones. Data suggests that in late 2008, 43 per cent of all mobile phones worldwide were in the Asian region, compared with a mere eight per cent in the United States. Mobile adoption has been remarkable around the world. It is the fastest-growing communication device in history. The past decade has seen a lot of change in how smartphones and the internet are used in India. It has resulted in a massive evolution in how news is covered by different media houses nationwide. Audiences now turn to the internet and smartphones for breaking news. Smartphones are being used as a medium to gather, produce and consume news.

Reporting with
Activity 1 Smartphones Keenly observe at least three television news channels and list news stories journalists report using smartphones. Compare the stories with conventional news stories. Differentiate based on the content and presentation.
11.4 SMARTPHONE: A NEW WAY OF DOING
JOURNALISM
The era of mobile media has driven communications convergence to a new stage. The last decade has seen a process of acceleration in mobile technology innovations. The peak of this scenario interests us to understand the various aspects related to smartphone communication, specifically reporting using a smartphone. Until now, we have understood that mobile journalism can be defined as gathering and delivering news using a smartphone. The technique of digital storytelling can be termed as 'smartphone reporting'. It is a new trend in news covering and broadcasting, which has the potential to become the new standard in journalism practice, mostly to break news.
11.4.1 Prerequisites for Smartphone Reporting
Smartphones today come with power-packed features, permitting sophisticated and live television reporting, replacing all the complicated and expensive equipment usually associated with making television news. Today, audiences know they can easily access the 'breaking news' on the internet through mobile phones before contacting their television sets or newspapers. Filling the story first for the mobile phone and the web has become second nature to many journalists. Preparedness: Reporting using a smartphone requires the journalist to be very alert, prompt, and prepared. In the cut-throat competition between channels for earning TRPs, the reporter must be ready and well prepared in advance to put on his/her journalist hat and start reporting the moment a news break. Having the gear handy: You must have understood now that a smartphone is a handy device, enabling the user to multitask. However, the journalist must keep his/her phone prepared to take pictures and videos when the news breaks. The phone should always be charged, as journalism has no scope for delay. Also, gear like the microphone, light, and tripod should be ready so the journalist can go into reporter mode anytime. Knowing your device: a reporter using a smartphone for reporting should know the product features, like the phone's functionality in different environments. Also, he/she should be well versed in the device's 'Pragmatic attributes' and 'Hedonic Attributes'. Here, Pragmatic attributes mean a smartphone's level and ease of connectivity between platforms -cellular and wi-fi. Meanwhile, hedonic attributes refer to simulation, identification, and evocation. Journalists must be aware of the applications (video and audio) smartphones can work with. A journalist using a smartphone for reporting is always advised to work on the device before diving into the work to become more comfortable with the workstation. 191

Mobile Journalism Mobile Application: As discussed above, the reporter needs to have complete Production Process knowledge of the applications that can be used to make the work easy and fast. Journalists can use various social media platforms like Twitter (now known as X) to remain informed. Various Google apps like Google Voice, Google Translate, Google Lens, etc., help new-age journalists perform faster. Apps like Zoom and Skype can also be used to do live reporting for a news channel while using a smartphone for reporting. Innovation: Reporting using a smartphone does make a lot of work easy by converging the technology to one point. However, this demands a lot of innovation from journalists. Finding and documenting something newsworthy is only half the battle. A journalist must put the different texts and elements of the story into a fluid, structured story. Structuring and telling the story correctly is an integral part of the process that can't be overlooked. Storytelling is an important element of mobile journalism or reporting with a smartphone.
11.4.2 Key Features: Pros and Cons
The flexibility and associated freedoms of reporting with a smart smartphone also have advantages and disadvantages. Let's learn and understand them. Below are some of the benefits of using a smartphone for reporting:
1. Smartphone reporting is low-cost compared with traditional reporting
methods and heavy-duty equipment. Capturing high-quality pictures, videos, and audio with phone needs without any additional cost is a money-saver. Even with the added costs, supplementary apps and equipment like mic microphones or tripods are a cost-effective way to tell a story.
2. Flexible: Reporting using a smartphone can be done single-handedly. It
doesn't require the hustle and bustle of too many people and equipment operators, making the work much more flexible. A reporter can move at his/her own pace, going wherever he/she wants to, whenever and without being held back.
3. Empowering: With the newfound flexibility and mobility comes much
independence for the reporter. He/she can work at his/her own pace and be free to choose the story. Using a smartphone for reporting empowers you to control every aspect of production, making your voice heard.
4. Discreet: There are instances where a reporter has to go to places he/
she doesn't want to go. This may be for coverage of any hard news or crime news per se. At such times, large camera and camera crews may have trouble accessing specific locations, events or happenings. But smartphones can be taken anywhere at any time.
5. Friendlier: A bulky professional camera can be intimidating. Reporters
might find it difficult to interview a politician or celebrity during a big breaking while using a professional camera, as they may be less open to doing so with the giant camera in their face. Smartphones are friendlier and familiar, making them more approachable to a person.

6. Safer: Journalism can be risky at times. Reporting on an incident like Reporting with
a natural disaster or from a war zone can be challenging. Using bulky Smartphones equipment can make it even more challenging. However, doing it from a mobile device prevents the reporter from drawing attention to himself/ herself in such riskier situations. It also allows the reporter to blend with the crowd and not be noticeable.
7. Makes job efficient: Reporting with a smartphone helps the journalist
be their cameraman, editor, and designer. With just one click, they can disseminate all the information in just a minute, making the job very efficient.
8. Democratised Craft of Journalism: Earlier, journalism was considered
the fiefdom of the intellect elite. However, with social media and smartphones, everybody can become a journalist, which has given rise to citizen journalism. This has ushered in the democratisation of the craft. There are two sides to a coin. With the many benefits of smartphone journalism come some disadvantages, too. Let's quickly understand the limitations a journalist faces while reporting using a smartphone.
1. Working alone: the downside to all the independence and freedom a
journalist gets while using a smartphone for reporting is that working alone can sometimes be difficult. A journalist is then responsible for every step of the process and every aspect of the project, from reporting to interviewing to filming and editing, all single-handedly, which can be exhausting. The journalist using a smartphone does a lot of responsibility and is expected to be well-versed in multiple skill sets.
2. Camera quality: Even though smartphones nowadays are loaded with
the latest technology, smartphone cameras are still fairly limited. They still need to film or photograph well in low-light settings compared to professional cameras with an apt lighting arrangement. They don't necessarily have an optical zoom, which might not give a very good- quality visual as required for television broadcasts. Phone cameras might also lack stability, producing shaky videos without any stabiliser.
3. Limited audio: Like the camera, smartphone audio is also fairly limited.
The recording quality drops significantly as the person moves away from the subject. Noise cut or noise correction may also not be proper because of the mic's lack of omnidirectional functionality. The reporter might face difficulty recording clear audio in overly crowded places outdoors.
4. Internet access and data dependence: A journalist might have difficulty
sending the feed through the smartphone in a remote area because of a lack of data or a poor internet connection. Being on the go and reporting from a wide variety of locations means that often, a journalist might not get a reliable connection, which may hinder his/her ability to work.
5. Battery: Despite their capabilities, smartphones generally lack long-
lasting batteries. The battery is mostly consumed by the applications frequently used by journalists to produce a new story. Keeping the battery charged is challenging in such cases, as a story may sometimes break. 193

Mobile Journalism 6. Storage Capacity: Another important limitation of using a smartphone Production Process for reporting is its storage capacity. With the number of applications one needs and the number of photographs, videos, and recordings required to break/file a story, a mobile journalist must keep ample room in the phone's memory card.
11.4.3 Novelty and Smartphones
Media houses have always been interested in new, more dynamic, lucrative ways to tell and sell news stories. The advent of the digital revolution and comparatively cheaper, more streamlined technology have led to an array of new hybrid forms. One such form is using a smartphone for reporting, a relatively free and limitless publication platform. Over a decade back, in 2007, communication moved from the desktop into the palms of the consumers and a new, more personalised smartphone era was born. In theory, the internet created a more democratic and diverse publishing model, which resulted in a shift to online communication. It made users feel they are part of a networked society, not merely as consumers but also as producers. One such aspect of novelty is citizen journalism. With the arrival of multimedia technology in mobile phones, citizen journalists have opened new news platforms to the public and pioneered the art of using raw materials to break urgent news into new storytelling styles. Reporting using a smartphone is active in areas where traditional media lacks the freedom of journalism and is a global phenomenon. Journalists worldwide are trying to take advantage of the existing technology in their smartphones for breaking news in case they cannot access their traditional equipment easily. However, in the current scenario, journalists on big media networks, like the TV Today network and Network 18, go deeper into exploring the world of mobile journalism. A premier example in India is NDTV, which has gone mobile since the latter part of 2017. Therefore, it is about more than immediate and breaking news; journalists can challenge their professional limits to dig into a story using mobile as a tool for journalism. Well-experienced journalists can also use their smartphones to indulge in good TV production, such as documentaries, drama series or professional news reports, thereby bringing novelty to journalism. The novelty brought by smartphones can also be linked to social media. Several mobile journalists are not related to specific media houses, and their main platform to publish the news is social media. The type of media content that freelance mobile journalists create is more suitable for social media, where things are shaped in an unofficial setup. Thus, social media platforms connect mobile journalists to their audience and the media houses. In some situations, like in the case of a war, natural calamity, or something unlikely to happen, the TV channel connects live with mobile journalists and establishes communication via social media applications like Skype, Zoom, etc. Individuals' work is considered a crowdsourcing process that helps media institutions focus on issues and problems raised by the audiences, bringing novelty to news coverage. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.

1. Define Mobile Journalism. Write about its need and relevance in the Reporting with
contemporary scenario. Smartphones

2. How is reporting using smartphones different from the conventional
methods of reporting? Explain with examples.

11.5 METHODS FOR MOBILE JOURNALISM
In the new world of breaking news, editors of media houses need to put into flexible teams of news gatherers who can provide content for the organisation's web, mobile, print or audio-visual editions. Stories driven by the news values are then delivered across platforms. Today, the media houses are aiming at multimedia, multi-media-focused newsrooms. No doubt, breaking news draws audiences to news organisations' websites. Multimedia breaking news builds an even bigger audience, thereby bringing more revenue. Theoretically, there are three levels of reporting: the first is 'breaking news', the second is the multimedia treatment of a news story, and the third is the feature form of reporting in a newspaper or a documentary kind of television channel. Mobile journalism is most appropriate for the first level of reporting- breaking news. Reporting from a smartphone can provide quick content for the website, such as a text message or a few sentences from the scene of an event. Mobile journalists can provide quick and repeated website updates and sometimes even write a story while on the field for a newspaper. There are a few software and hardware requirements for reporting using a smartphone, which are discussed below. Software: Several companies offer software that lets mobile journalists stream live video from a smartphone to the web. Reporters can use their mobile phones like miniature camcorders to capture news almost live. However, there can be a delay of a few seconds depending on the size of the transmitted file and the network being used. Some of the applications that mobile journalists frequently use for doing their work are Zoom, Skype, StreamYard and LiveU. Zoom is a cloud-based peer-to-peer application that allows mobile journalists to report live from any remote location. Through this mobile application, a reporter can also make video calls. Skype: Skype is a telecommunication tool by Microsoft Co. It provides VoIP, videoconferencing, and voice calls, helping mobile journalists report live without other technical support, just like Zoom 195

Mobile Journalism StreamYard is a platform for live coverage through smartphones. It is a Production Process professional live streaming and recording studio that allows a reporter to record content directly on the news organisation's social media pages with various customised features. LiveU is a leading provider of live video contributions for news. It enables the reporter to send a live feed while reporting with a minimum time lag. Many big media banners use this live video transmission and video streaming tool. WeTransfer is an application and website that enables users to send files globally in just one click. Large video files and photos can be sent. The application allows free transfer of files up to 2GB. Hardware: Smartphone: Though mobile journalism only requires a good quality smartphone, having the right phone is important. The phone chosen should be an 'easy-to-use' one that suits the technical level of the journalist. It won't be used if it is difficult to use. Also, choosing a phone with a fast, multi-core chipset that spreads the load to increase app speed and reduce power consumption is essential. Integration with all apps, formats, workflows and peripherals is also important. Microphone: if you are closer to your subject with little background noise, then the smartphone microphone or the one on the headset will be enough. However, using a third-party microphone is advisable if it's the other way around. Shotgun mics are most preferred for all hand-held close-quarter filming. These shotgun mics have a cardioid pattern that predominantly records sound in front of the microphone. Wireless microphones can also record audio when the source is at some distance from the smartphone and where the sound source might be moving in a demonstration or walk-and-talk interview. Lights: Smartphones are not normally equipped to capture a video in low- light situations. Therefore, on-camera lights can be used for a better visual experience. The intensity of the light should be taken care of while choosing one. Tripod: A lightweight tripod can be used as a handle to stabilise hand-held shots when attached to a cradle. It is easy to carry, provides extra height, and effectively changes angles. A tripod with a removable leg can be transformed into a monopod. Camera Cradles: Cradles are useful as they add structure, useability, and balance while working on a hand-held. They also provide attachment points for microphones, lights and tripods.
11.6 CLASSIC EXAMPLES OF MOJO STORIES
1. India's Farmers' Protest
In the year 2020-2021, the Indian farmer's protest was a protest against three farm acts that the Parliament of India passed in September 2020. In opposition

to the Farm Bills, often called 'anti-farmer laws' by many farmer unions, the Reporting with protest demanded the creation of a minimum support price (MSP) bill to ensure Smartphones that corporations cannot control the price. Soon after the acts were introduced, unions began holding local protests, mostly in Punjab. The protest was overtaken after several citizen journalists and mobile journalists posted news feeds on social media. Independent journalist, who also amassed a following on Twitter, routinely provided updates on the protest and its historical context. Their primary platform was social media. Many big and niche media organisations took up the news feeds of mobile journalists.
2. Controversies Surrounding Different Service Providers
Recently, there have been many controversies surrounding the various service providers, such as Zomato, Swiggy, Ola, Uber, and online pizza delivery companies. Citizens have been very active in journaling about various unpleasant events. One shocking incident occurred in 2018 when a Zomato delivery person was caught on camera by a citizen journalist opening packs meant for delivery and eating out of them. The man ate from one pack and repacked the rest, making it look untouched. The video went viral on social media, and the food delivery giant had to apologise on the public forum. A similar case happened with a leading cab provider when a driver was seen being thrashed by a woman traveller in Lucknow. The incident was captured on a phone camera, which went viral on social media, so much so that it became a news story on television. The police then interrogated the case, and the company had to look into the matter because of media hype. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1) Is reporting using smartphones a groundbreaking way of doing journalism?
Discuss its advantages and disadvantages to support your answer.

2) List two mobile journalism examples you have come across recently.

11.7 CHALLENGES OF REPORTING WITH
SMARTPHONE
In this digital media age, journalism's new features are characterised by convergence, mobility, and interactivity. Mobile journalism, or reporting using smartphones, has emerged as a new journalistic form that challenges the relationship between creators and recipients of media content.

Mobile Journalism 11.7.1 Constraints
Production Process
When discussing journalism and breaking news, the fundamental question is balancing speed versus quality. Breaking the story first may sometimes mean compromising accuracy. But journalism is all about truth and dare. Therefore, reporters must be fast and accurate to ensure quality content before breaking the news. Another constraint that mobile journalists have to deal with is infrastructure. Even though mobile phones constantly improve, a smooth network's availability remains the key issue. Reporters prioritise sending the news feed on time or streaming live video. Technical challenges such as battery charging are also important aspects and challenges faced by journalists reporting using a smartphone. In the quest to break the news first, sometimes journalists or media organisations are involved in potential legal problems. Obtaining on-the-spot images that are visually attractive and can earn TRPs sometimes lands the journalist in trouble. Therefore, legal and copyright issues remain a dominating constraint. Last but not least, mobile journalism also poses life risks and data risks. Like traditional journalism, mobile journalism is unsafe because of its risks and dangers to journalists, especially during war news coverage. Though reporting using a smartphone in risky areas has an advantage as it reduces the suspicion about the journalist, it also has a disadvantage. Similarly, risks and dangers in a journalist's life are related to the risks and security of the data used in the smartphone. The reports must be safely saved on the smartphone to prevent data copying.
11.7.2 Content
As discussed above, reporting news quickly and accurately is the biggest challenge media houses face with the new trend of smartphone reporting. The journalists are expected to break the news when it happens with full credibility. While mainstream journalists are at par with this approach, the reports made by citizen journalists are a controversial issue. Some people find it hard to believe in the news made by unknown sources who don't have any responsibility and commitment regarding the credibility of what they post on their social media handles. An ordinary person reporting using a smartphone might show one side of the coin without being assertive about the version of a credible source, which might not be the case with the journalists attached to the media house as they are versed with the ethical norms of journalism. It is common these days that most television news channels have a segment where they fact-check the reports filed by citizen journalists or freelance journalists through smartphones. The news stories taken here are mostly those which go viral on social media and might have some impact on society as a whole. Good quality content is the key to good journalism, even if it means sacrificing the willingness to publish exclusive and breaking news.
11.7.3 Packaging
Today, journalism is more about earning good TRPs. A journalist reporting using a smartphone must break the news first and deliver a news package. The news package includes photos, audio, animated information graphics, news tweets and live streaming. Journalists on the go use several tools and techniques to make packages. Different mobile applications can be used to make news packages. External devices like microphone, earphone, external

light, tripod, power bank. For a smooth package, a journalist is advised not to Reporting with Smartphones film in automatic mode, in bright sunlight in the dark, or against the light. As the news package may get telecast directly on the channel, it is important to take care of the technicalities of media production as well.
11.8 ETHICS OF REPORTING WITH
SMARTPHONE
One of the aspects of mobile journalism is that it involves professionals and amateurs in the same work that needs nothing more than a device and a sense of ambition. A large number of citizen journalists, who are ordinary people, produce a massive number of materials and products in the media industry both via social media platforms and directly to media institutions. In both cases, the individuals participate in newsmaking and push news organisations to highlight the issues that the individuals have raised. This is a good way, as it allows the journalist to dive deep into the subject and raise concerns, giving true essence to journalistic practices. However, with independence and freedom comes the factor of concern: the 'violation of privacy'. Using mobile phones for public filming without obtaining permission from the individuals being filmed is unethical. The fundamental values of journalism stay the same regardless of the medium. With the rise of false, paid, and fake news, ethical issues remain a matter of concern. Journalists from Asian professional organisations probably follow the organisation's code of ethics. However, reporting from smartphones is not restricted to professional journalists only and not all journalists are members of professional bodies. Therefore, freelance mobile journalists in India are expected to follow a personal code beyond the professional code. A journalist should be committed to voluntarily following the ethical codes of conduct to avoid damaging someone's reputation, trolling, and publishing false news. Another ethical aspect related to mobile journalism is the risk of violating the privacy of data, which may happen unintentionally when someone loses his smartphone or is hacked. The private data and footage can be stolen. The ethical side of violating privacy also has a relation to trust. Fake news is mainly aimed at tarnishing someone else's reputation, preventing people from knowing the truth. Mobile journalists must avoid floating misleading or fake information against human morality and ethical principles. Journalists throughout the Asian region need to understand the laws related to shooting video--a thorough knowledge of defamation law and related laws of privacy and trespass reports.
11.9 FUTURE OF SMARTPHONE REPORTING
A radical shift has occurred in how news is produced and consumed in a decade. Smartphones are getting more and more powerful with time, making it difficult to predict the scenario for next year. However, despite all these changes, traditional media still exists and survives. Even though mobile journalism comes with many benefits, it is far from coming to the notion that reporting from a smartphone can be an absolute alternative to conventional media options- TV, radio and newspaper. But, at the same time, many researchers have realised that at some point in the future, information will be communicated on wireless devices, and the primary device on which this will happen will be the mobile phone.

Mobile Journalism Meanwhile, there is no doubt that Internet penetration in India is high in urban Production Process and rural populations. The content created digitally is being heavily accessed on wireless devices. Many smartphone users in India use data connections to get news on the go. News agencies like Reuters and ANI are pushing video stories in the form of audio and video podcasts that can be run on laptops and mobiles. TV news channels, too, are coming up with short videos for their social media handles. Consumers have access to the news as it breaks, and they can access information at any place. For media houses, it is going to be challenging. They have to keep pace with technology and ensure that the news is delivered on time, as in the case of mobile journalism, there will be no luxury on time. Systems must be set to cross-check news and move it out quickly in the cut-throat competitive world.
11.10 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we have explored the various aspects of smartphone reporting. These include the theory and technicality of it. The traditional methods for gathering information for a news story through interviews, observation and document searches are lengthy and need perfect coordination between the journalists (reporter and photo/video journalist, who clicks and records all the visuals). However, fast-paced digital technology has transformed and accelerated how journalists work in the past decade. Journalists nowadays use technology to do their jobs well and quickly. As media scholars, we know that 'breaking news' drives traffic to news channels and newspaper websites. Therefore, speed has become a top priority for journalists and media houses, along with the element of novelty. A reporter armed with a mobile phone and an internet connection can get multimedia breaking faster than a team of reporters and camera people covering an event/happening. The large-scale use of smartphones and the internet has shifted media consumption patterns. Today, consumers want fast news on their technical devices. Reporting with smartphones gives way to speed reporting, but accuracy remains a challenge for journalists and media organisations. Reporting using smartphones also has ethical implications and privacy issues, which are all dealt with in this Unit.
11.11 KEYWORD
Quasi Media: The kind of media, which was once called mass communication, like books, newspapers, radio, TV, etc., that involves the stretching of social relations across space and time and which involves a certain narrowing of the range of symbolic clues is called quasi media. An example is Social Media. Phablet: A phablet is a mobile device that combines the size formats of smartphones and tablets with a tablet-like screen and a smartphone-like body. The word is a blend of phone and tablet. Fake News: False or misleading information presented as news is called Fake News. It is usually targeted at some person or used as propaganda.

Breaking news is receiving and broadcasting information about a recent event. Reporting with First, breaking the news often attracts more viewership to news channels, Smartphones earning them TRPs.
11.12 FURTHER READING
1. Burum, I. (2021). The MOJO Handbook. New York and London: Routledge.
2. Quinn, P. S. (2009). The Mobile Journalist- From Backpack to Pocket
Journalism. IFRA.
3. Quinn, S. (2011). Mojo-Mobile Journalism In The Asian Region. Konrad
Adenauer Stiftung
4. Salzmann, A. (2022). Responsible innovation in Mobile Journalism.
Skipnes Kommunikasjon, University of Bergen.
5. Schleser, M. (2021). Smartphone Filmmaking: Theory and Practice. New
York: Bloomsbury.
6. Schulz, P. J., & Paul, C. (2014). Mediation of Communication: Handbook
of Communication Science. De Gruyter Mouton.
11.13 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Mobile journalism, or reporting from a smartphone, is an emerging
technique of new media storytelling where reporters use portable electronic devices to gather news, edit it, and distribute it from their smartphones to their community via a stable internet connection. Today, it seems very relevant because of the country's high internet penetration and the demand for fast news.
2. When we compare smartphone reporting with conventional methods, we
see that mobile reporting is more affordable, fast, flexible, empowering, discreet, friendlier, safer, and efficient. However, it does come with technical limitations. Examples of smartphone reporting are war, natural calamity, remote areas, etc. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Reporting using a smartphone is a fast-emerging, new creative trend in the
media industry, revolutionising how news is gathered and disseminated to diverse audiences. Reporters and correspondents are now being trained to handle their mobile devices to broadcast news content using digital devices such as smartphones, tablets, digital cameras, etc. Using the all- in-one devices, journalists are single-handedly capable of doing all jobs without needing more workforce, which indeed is groundbreaking in the field of journalism. Advantages include speed, effectiveness, friendliness, discreetness, more freedom for the journalist, etc., while disadvantages include the required network connection, battery life, privacy issues, etc.
2. The learner can mention any two recent news stories that he/she came
across. 201

UNIT 12 SCRIPT WRITING FOR MOJO
STORIES
Structure
12.0 Introduction
12.1 Learning Outcomes
12.2 New Age Storytelling
12.3 Difference Between Traditional Story Writing and MoJo Writing
12.4 The Process of Scripting
12.4.1 Choosing the Subject
12.4.2 Planning a Story
12.4.3 Research for Writing
12.4.4 Visualizing the Storyline
12.4.5 Writing the Story Draft
12.4.6 Writing the Final Story
12.4.7 Checking and Revising
12.4.8 Finalizing the Headline/Title
12.4.9 Checking and Concluding
12.5 Format of Scripting
12.6 Do's and Dont's of Scripting for Mojo
12.7 How to Use Collected Data in the Script
12.8 MoJo Scripting for Different Media
12.8.1 Writing for Internet
12.8.2 Writing for Television
12.9 Using Other Material like Quotes and Poetry in Scripting
12.10 Points to Remember While Scripting
12.11 Scripting for Different Kinds of Mojo Stories
12.11.1 Breaking News Story
12.11.2 Follow-up Story
12.11.3 Character-Based Story
12.11.4 Event Based Story
12.12 Let Us Sum Up
12.13 Keywords
12.14 Further Readings
12.15 Check your Progress: Possible Answer

Scripting for Mojo
12.0 INTRODUCTION
Stories Mobile Journalism stories have revolutionized the field of Journalism. They have created a massive shift in working style and conception of news, especially in times of crisis, where it has become difficult to take professional cameras and other equipment to the field. In extreme situations where getting help was difficult, Mojo made it possible to cover such areas and situations of high tension. It kept the people updated about public health crises like pandemics. Scripting for Mojo has its benefits and challenges, too. In this Unit, we will learn all about Scripting for Mojo.
12.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to :
* Understand the Process of Writing for Mojo;
* Know about the Do's and don'ts of Writing for Mojo; * Gain an insight into writing essentials in the evolving field of Mojo; and * Learn to plan a story, research for a story and write it in a proper format.
12.2 NEW AGE STORYTELLING
Back then, people would wait for the newspaper to arrive the next morning to know what happened about an event, situation or crisis. With the broadcasting of news channels, people started to learn about things 24*7. Numerous internet platforms emerged with time, and news from around the world became available with a mouse click. The news became much more accessible. With time and need, the world of news has evolved. We have mobile phones, easy-to-carry devices with applications enabled, taking journalism to a newer level. Today, some resources stand beyond challenges to make information reach people reliably and easily. Challenges include fake news, misleading information, or poorly edited, out-of-context content spreading like wildfire. Mojo storytelling works in every possible way. Big media houses have adopted this approach and initiated separate slots in their programming timeline. It has become easier to record, edit and produce news content as Mojo makes a journalist less burdened from sharing heavy footage. Mojo has facilitated sharing raw video content in less time and simplified editing. There are applications to edit and produce news content that is user- friendly and professional at the same time. If two people, i.e. the reporter and camera person, cannot reach the situation as it becomes difficult during a pandemic, the reporter does the job with a mobile phone. It is quick, real, short, entertaining/informative and impactful. It is everything that the time requires. You can easily travel with simple equipment and a mobile phone to capture events/situations in any part of the world. It makes the reporter independent and the process easier.

12.3 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TRADITIONAL
Production Process
STORY WRITING AND MOJO WRITING
Scripting is a basic yet crucial part of any production. Although the scripting process has evolved with audio or video production format changes, the essence has remained the same. The art of conveying in a grasping manner is what makes a script stand out. Let us understand how scripting for Mojo stories differs from other established formats. * Mojo scripts are compact, crisp, and to the point, built using a vocabulary of everyday language. Traditional story writing builds a strong background and sometimes approaches the subject indirectly, whereas, in Mojo stories, a direct introduction to the subject is practised while writing. * Traditional storytelling describes every aspect of the story in variable detail and sometimes discusses previous links associated with the story. Although most Mojo stories are short and comprehensive, they stick to the current scenario. The script must cover exactly and accurately what is happening now. * Writing for Mojo stories involves capturing visuals on a mobile phone, which may follow different cuts and editing methods. So, the script must be a clever interpretation of the visuals. In traditional storytelling, there is some liberty in choosing from the multi-cam set-up. * Mojo story writing allows you to write on various subjects on the spot. So, one must be well prepared with facts and details about the subject. * Mojo's story plays a vital role in covering extreme or crucial situations, such as natural calamities or other threatening or hazardous events. In such cases, the writing helps to assemble the footage containing various details recorded entirely on the spot. The writing also provides good transitions and effectively sums up the whole scenario. * It is said that a photograph is equal to a thousand words. But we also know many times that many channels use the same visuals, but what is said becomes a considerable factor in the impact building. Scripting in day-to-day language and telling the story in first person account with a creative story structure with valid references is usually the requirement. On the other hand, traditional storytelling can also be told in a third-person account. * In Traditional Storytelling, different people may play different roles. Still, in a Mojo story, the reporter has to handle the camera work, decide on the shots, take interviews, and write the script simultaneously. So, MOJO writing is not just the words you hear; it is about knowledge, learning, experiences, and attention to detail, which make a well-written script.
12.4 THE PROCESS OF SCRIPTING
Understanding the process of scriptwriting is very important. Whenever we see a film or hear a drama on the radio, watch a news piece or scroll over a reel on social media, the script can make a subject interesting and impactful at the same 204 time. But how? Let's try to understand.

12.4.1 Choosing the Subject Scripting for Mojo
Stories There are different beats of journalism. A subject is chosen based on relevance and recent occurrence. However, the treatment differs from channel to channel or person to person. The scriptwriter should understand the subject very well before starting to write anything. Some events happening today might be associated with some previous happenings. The writer should be aware of it and could research it to make the writing authentic and potent.
12.4.2 Planning a Story
Planning involves brainstorming ideas and deciding on the treatment one will give, aspects to cover, whom to interview, and whether to include vox pop. Then, you plan your writing according to the elements involved. For example, writing to connect the interview to Vox Pop. You can only do that properly when you have clear planning and how to execute.
12.4.3 Research for Writing
Well-researched scripts are reflected in the final product. There are primary information resources, such as contacting the people involved or who witnessed the event. Then, secondary resources like searching the Internet or finding research/s or facts in the concerned department. For example, suppose you are writing about a health issue. In that case, your primary information can be gathered from a person suffering from that issue, and secondary data can be collected from the Health Department of India or WHO, etc.
12.4.4 Visualizing the Storyline
When a story is conceptualized, the writer has a vision which he pens down. The story is created first in mind and then on paper. You use your imagination and knowledge creatively to develop a step-by-step procedure. The introduction will be from a VO, i.e., voice-over with a long shot, then the body of news will contain the required elements, and the conclusion will be a montage with a VO, etc.
12.4.5 Writing the Story Draft
Writing for Mojo's story is an interesting process because the art of writing is compact yet appealing here. The first draft is usually a rough draft where you write something, then read it to make changes and then write again. That means you now have written words to improve and correct. The first draft may be longer, may contain some grammatical or other errors, or may not be as explicit as you expected. But it does serve as a base to continue for better writing.
12.4.6 Writing the Final Story
This part of the process is where you finalize the draft, which includes a proper catchy introduction covering all the important elements in the body of the story and a thought-provoking conclusion. The script must explain the subject unbiasedly and raise questions in the audience's minds.

Mobile Journalism 12.4.7 Checking and revising.
Production Process
Checking for grammatical or other errors is very important in the final draft. The language used should be crisp and proper. Also, the writer must remember that it should not hurt the sentiments of the individual, community, religion, nation, and culture. It should not be derogatory or contain any unproven facts or unsubstantiated claims. The writer has to be careful with the choice of words as it may impact many people.
12.4.8 Finalizing the Headline/Title
A catchy headline or title decides whether people will watch the story. The title should state what the Mojo story is all about. It should be inclusive yet short. If it's misleading in any manner, then the whole story will be impacted. The title should follow the SCISSOR method. S - Simple C - Catchy I - Innovative S - Short S - Supportive to the story O - Objective R - Relevant
12.4.9 Checking and Concluding
Lastly, read the final script as a reader or viewer to feel how your writing will be conceived. You can conclude by repeating the important points, making a powerful statement that will have an impact, or raising a question that will lead people to think more about your subject after the news broadcast. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Explain five differences between Mojo Script Writing and traditional Script
Writing.

2. What is the process of scripting? Mention all steps and explain any five
steps.

Scripting for Mojo
Stories

3. List five news ideas and write reasons why they are relevant to be picked
up.

12.5 FORMAT OF SCRIPTING
You might come across various styles and formats when you see a news story. Mojo storytelling itself challenges traditional ways and is constantly evolving. They are more interactive and expressive. But the essence of journalism lies in the proper communication of facts. For that, you must understand the basics of any news writing, which is the inverted pyramid structure of writing, and for broadcast news writing, the Dramatic Unity Structure is used. Once your basics areu cnldaerrisfiteandd, yMoouj oca nne wuns dwerristtianngd b eMttoerj.o news writing better. The lead The most important information 5Ws and 1 H
The Body
Important details and information
The Tail
The least important information is enclosed. The 5 Ws are What? When? Why? When? Where, and 1 H is How? Good news writing will Thaen 5sw Wer st haersee qWuehsatti?o nWs ihneitnia?l lWy shoy t?h eW auhdeine?n cWe here, and 1 H is How? Good news writing will answer these questions initially so the audience will fully understand the event. Other important information follows, such as further details, a background story, arguments, disputes, etc. Finally, in the end, the information that may be deemed required and has interest value can be added. Dramatic Unity Structure consists of 3 parts - Climax, Cause and Effect. Climax: The first part gives the most important information to the viewers, such as the story's lead. It also discusses what happened. Cause: This part tells the viewers why it happened. After knowing what happened, one wants to know why it happened. The occurrence of an event has a cause or reason. So, this part allows the audience to understand the reason.

Mobile Journalism Effect: This part gives further insights into the story. It can discuss the impact, Production Process actions, consequences, measures taken, etc. Mojo story writing adheres to the basics of news writing, but it allows you to be more creative and experimental to create a more valid, authentic experience for people.
12.6 DO'S AND DON'TS OF SCRIPTING FOR
MOJO
* Do not over explain. Remember that you are writing to support visuals. Write when you feel the visual needs to be clarified, or the words will enhance its beauty. * Use words that are easy to speak and everyday spoken language. This allows people to connect with the story. * Don't use offensive language or hurtful words. If the script is derogatory to the country, its culture, foreign relations, any religion, etc., it will be rejected, or you may face the consequences. Learn to write what must be said in a powerful yet respectful manner. * Don't repeat too many words. Overuse of particular words and phrases might make your script dull and monotonous. * Use authentic information from verified sources in your script. Today, a lot of information is freely available from multiple sources. Take time to check your facts before writing them down in the script. Use official websites and contact the concerned departments or people to get verified information on your subject. * Give credit to the writer or poet if you use their poems or quotes in your scripts. * Make your script unique and exciting. Add punchlines and use creativity to enhance your script. * Do extensive research to add credibility to your script. Look for primary and secondary sources of information to support your script. * In Mojo, time is of the essence. Learn to say more in fewer words, avoid writing long sentences, and practice saying the same things in fewer words. * Write in a conversational language. Write as you are speaking to the viewer. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Write down 2 Do's and 2 Don'ts to remember in Mojo Script Writing.

2. Select two news items and identify the 5 Ws and 1 H in them. Scripting for Mojo
Stories

12.7 HOW TO USE COLLECTED DATA IN THE
SCRIPT
The subject can be fascinating, the shots may be accurate, and the script could be creative, but if the facts and figures are not properly utilized, the production will lose its value. So, one must know how to utilize the gathered information and data. You have learned about how and where to collect data for your report. Now, let us see how we can use it in the script. There are different ways to teach facts in your script. When you state research data, always mention the name of the agency, department, or organization from where you obtained that data. If the data is shocking or makes the subject even more relevant, you can start writing your story with it. For example, if you are writing about the increase in inflation. You may share the percentage, and after establishing that it will affect the audience, you may write in detail about what is happening because of it or what things in the future may look like. Another way to start a story is to talk about a person affected by an event and then later mention the data to support your news. For example, if you are writing about the increasing school dropout rate in certain areas. You may begin your story by telling about a child who dropped out and let people know why he did that and how things are going for him. Afterwards, you can mention the percentage of students who drop out each year in that area. The benefit in this case is that people will connect emotionally with the child and pay more attention to the data. In the era of Mojo, reaching directly to the audience, you must not overload your news piece with narrating facts and figures at once. A balanced writing approach is necessary, or you may lose the audience's interest.
12.8 MOJO SCRIPTING FOR DIFFERENT
MEDIA
Mojo has emerged as a fast, effective tool that needs minimal resources to capture any happening and gives a detailed outlook to the audience. When we say fast, we must remember that the skills should be polished, and preparations must be on point. Writing for Mojo requires quick and effective writing skills, as you must reach out to the audience with a full news package in no time. Journalism and Writing basics remain the same, but let us understand how Mojo's writing for television and the Internet differs.
12.8.1 Writing for Internet
Firstly, we should understand that the Internet offers a lot of content in different formats. Journalism should not be confused with vlogging. Its sole purpose differs, which is why the way of writing differs. Journalistic writing

Mobile Journalism revolves around information, while a vlog might be made for entertainment on Production Process information based on personal opinions. Writing for Mojo on the Internet gives you more freedom and space. You can take advantage of flexible time duration; if the news piece demands more, you can write more about it. Your writing must be crisp and clear, as skipping or scrolling is common on the Internet. Suppose, for any reason, the visuals captured in some part are not of good quality, yet you want to use it as it is very important. Then you may mention that in your writing if the situation allows. People like things to be realistic. If the story is long, you may release it in multiple parts on the Internet, covering different aspects in different news videos. This gives space for some extensive writing. The news content must abide by the journalistic guidelines, rules and ethics to keep the spirit of real journalism alive in Mojo. It is fascinating and competitive simultaneously, but only write what you know. Don't make assumptions or believe social media blindly. You are writing for a medium which is sadly a hub for fake news, so you must get all facts checked before writing them into a script. Write fast, but do not allow time constraints to make you less vigilant towards authenticity. The Internet has a variety of audiences; know your Target group, understand your audience and write accordingly. The Internet is a medium of interaction; it is not a one-way street. So, write accordingly. Read a few comments, take feedback on the same subject and write what people want to know about that subject.
12.8.2 Writing for Television
For decades, television has been the platform for 24-hour news broadcasts. Now, Mobile journalism is taking another step ahead. From High-quality cameras to taking videos on phones and broadcasting them, television has shown its capacity to accept and evolve. Writing for such a medium in Mojo, where a certain news standard is set, becomes crucial. You have to write with the footage or visuals collected in mind. The standards and policies of each channel are definitive. You have to write keeping them in mind. Every journalist has his way and style, which also must be considered. For example, suppose you must write a connecting VO of a journalist covering the Olympics in a foreign nation and a vox-pop Indian audience cheering for India. In that case, your writing must maintain enthusiasm for sports and pick on the journalist's words for better connecting lines. Let us take another situation of a journalist covering a crisis like an earthquake or flood. In such cases, the journalist usually speaks while covering the event, and a script is only needed for the parts where the journalist cannot be adequately heard or to add some info that has arrived after the journalist has finished his recording. In this scenario, you have to write short and direct. It would help if you wrote to inform and not scare people of the situation. It is the type of writing that helps people understand a scenario easily and lets people see all sides/ perspectives of an event. The time slots are fixed on television, so I must write accordingly. Even if the news seems huge, you must fit it into the scheduled time slot.
12.9 USING OTHER MATERIAL LIKE QUOTES
POETRY IN SCRIPTING
Powerful lines, poetries, and stories have successfully imparted wisdom, 210 strengthened cultures, united people, and initiated societal change. That is the

power of words. Numerous great poets and authors have written brilliantly Scripting for Mojo on different aspects and areas. We know that even when India fought for Stories freedom from British rule, the songs and slogans helped people get together and motivated them to stay strong. We are talking about using this writing on a concerned subject. First, make sure that the lines you use accompany your subject. It would help if you used the exact words while quoting somebody else. The poetry may be long, but you can use a couple of lines depending on the necessity of the script. While using poetry, remember that you do not break its flow. You can listen to poetry readings to develop an understanding of its flow. For example, there is a very famous poem written by a great Indian poetess named Subhadra Kumari Chauhan on Jhansi ki Rani -Laxmi Bai. The entire poem is very long, but you can select the lines like - ^ped mBh lu lUkkou esa] og ryokj iqjkuh Fkh cqansys gjcksyksa ds eq!g geus lquh dgkuh Fkh [kwc yM+h enkZuh og rks >k!lh okyh jkuh Fkh*- Here, these three lines make up a paragraph that repeats. It is the main stanza. Other stanzas consist of more lines. When you write, you feel 2 lines or four lines make a balanced poem, but a poem has its flow, and you have to recognize that by reading it out loud before writing it down. The paragraphs in poetry may contain lines in the order of 4-2-4-2 or 4-3-4, etc. Depending on your writing language, you can use Urdu, Shayari or any other language for poems. The writer also has to ensure that the people understand these lines well. You can explain it a bit if needed. There are a few well-known lines which serve as the identity of the poem. You can use those lines to get the desired impact. If you choose any lines from the middle of the poem, it should justify the accompanying visuals. Always give credit to the writer/poet whose lines you are using. This way, your script will have more elements and sound great. It is not necessary to use a quote or poem in a script; it depends on the requirement and creativity. In Mojo, you must be precise with the words. You cannot narrate a whole poem or use full paragraphs as it will take time and may shift attention from the news. It can be a concluding choice of P2C or an introductory voice-over. It should only be used to support the main subject.
12.10 POINTS TO REMEMBER WHILE
SCRIPTING
* You should be able to explain your news in the first paragraph. People should know what they see and why it is relevant to them from the beginning. * Avoid stereotyping in your scripting, as it will make your writing taste bad. * To be a good writer, you must first be a good reader. You should read books of different genres and articles and listen to good podcasts, interviews, and news stories. 211

Mobile Journalism * Raise those questions with your writing that you think the audience would Production Process want to know, such as what happened, why it happened, what will happen next, what the solution can be, etc. * What you want to highlight, you can write about it twice or more than that but try to be creative and not repeat sentences. For example, you want to highlight that schools will reopen on 20th January after winter break. You may write this differently at different times. One time, the sentence could be 'Schools are reopening on 20th January'; another time, it could be said,' It seems like the fog will settle down on 20th morning, giving school children a clear morning to go to school after winter break. Etc. * There should be clarity in writing, or people may need to understand even well-shot footage. * Script Writing should be in a talking form. It should not feel like a huge monologue or opinion expression. * Always remember to use full forms first in the news. When a word is repeated, you may use its acronym. For example, first, you can write World Health Organization; then, on repetition, you can write its acronym, WHO. * If a sentence appears complicated for the general audience to understand, change it in your script and simplify it. Keep it easy and real. * When you write, be aware that you are not passing judgment or defaming someone. * If you have a choice between a long word and a short word when both mean the same, choose the short one with easy pronunciation. * While writing, forget other things around you and focus on the subject for better results. * Always choose your words carefully. Different words have the same meaning but different intentions. For example, 'Childish' and 'Childlike' both mean behaving like children, but the first word has a negative tone, and the second has a positive tone. In any language, use words that match the tone of your writing. * Try to make a sentence short. Long sentences can often be confusing and time-consuming. Check Your Progress: 3 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Mention 5 points to remember while scripting for a Mojo story.

2. Identify a Mojo story and write a new script for the video. Scripting for Mojo
Stories

12.11 SCRIPTING FOR DIFFERENT KINDS OF
MOJO STORIES
Mojo stories are not different from other stories, but they overcome the limitations of other stories. They can be recorded in crises, uploaded soon, etc. Let us understand how to write scripts for different kinds of Mojo stories.
12.11.1 Breaking News Story
When something happens that affects the majority of people or matters to them. It is shown to people as soon as it happens. These stories are broadcasted even between other stories because of their priority level. You get very little time to write these stories. It is important to understand what is happening and then write about it. Sometimes, when in a hurry, the wrong words or meanings can get delivered. So, you have to be very careful. In such cases, full information is often unavailable for writing, so you will have to manage and write what you know till now. It should not feel incomplete but should be able to build anticipation.
12.11.2 Follow-Up Story
Following up on important news is as important as a new story. While writing for a follow-up story, you must know about the original story, its timing, its changing dynamics and what the audience should know about it now. You can reference the original story pic and where it ended and continue. You should introduce the newer aspect of the story and mention why it is relevant to follow up on it. For example, if a crime has been committed and a story has already been broadcast about it, the court has given its verdict, so you write a follow- up story and write about the latest developments in the case. When the court declares the person responsible for the crime, you may mention that in your script. But before that, the media did not have the right to call a person a thief, murderer or criminal just based on other information. Be particular about your chosen words, as they can have a huge impact.
12.11.3 Character/Person Based Story
It can be a human interest, political, criminal, etc. Still, if any story revolves around a person or focuses more on a single person or group rather than an event, we will discuss it here. When you are writing about a famous person or someone who has achieved something commendable and is now getting famous, there is much information about him/her roaming on the Internet. Other celebrities or political personalities will also give statements. When you write about such a personality, you can include statements given by some well- known people. It would help if you avoided rumours and gossip. You can find

Mobile Journalism a new angle and write something new, as there must have been many articles Production Process or videos about that person. So, if you are writing about him/her now, it should differ from previous productions or add value to them. If there is a controversy, do not just write about one side of the story but also try to find out about the other side/s. A writer must be unbiased and should not write based on his/her personal opinions. Avoid using controversial words or derogatory remarks that defame someone.
12.11.4 Event Based Story
When you are writing about a recent happening or event, things are new and still unravelling. Being updated minute by minute becomes important. Study the visuals properly before writing, and then start writing only. If you have important information but do not have the visuals yet. You must make sure that you write in such a way that people get the whole idea, even without the visual. You or your team can use graphs or animation during such times, but the role of the script becomes more crucial in this scenario. Many times, in Mojo, the reporter is like a one-person army. He/she records, edits, writes, and produces. You will have to write where you feel the connectivity of visuals could be improved or the flow of the story could be better.
12.12 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we learned about writing for Mojo stories. We discussed how it is different from other traditional storytelling methods. We learned about the writing process and the format to follow while writing a news story. We discussed how to utilize data and other available information in scripting. We learned about the Do's and Don'ts of Writing for Mojo. We discussed writing for different mediums and kinds of stories. We also came across important points to remember while writing.
12.13 KEYWORDS
Smartphone journalism: Journalism practised using smartphones. Digital storytelling: Storytelling at digital platforms. Mobile news production: Creating, editing, and producing news with the help of mobile applications.
12.14 FURTHER READINGS
1. Mobile Journalism: A Handbook for Reporters" by Glen Mulcahy
2. Mojo: The Mobile Journalism Handbook" by Ivo Burum and Steve Davis
3. Smartphone Media Production: A Media Revolution for Everyone" by
Robb Montgomery
4. The Mobile Journalism Manual" by Markus Meissen
5. Mojo Guide to Mobile Journalism" by Wytse Vellinga

6. Mobile-First Journalism by Steve Hill, Paul Bradshaw Scripting for Mojo
Stories
7. Mobile Storytelling in an Age of Smartphones by Max Schleser, Xiaoge
Xu
12.15 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Five differences are as follows: -
* Mojo scripts are compact, crisp, to the point and built using the vocabulary of daily use language. Traditional story writing builds a strong background and sometimes approaches the subject indirectly, whereas, in Mojo stories, a direct introduction to the subject is practised while writing. * Traditional storytelling describes every aspect of the story in variable detail and sometimes discusses previous links associated with the story. Although most Mojo stories are short and comprehensive, they stick to the current scenario. The script must cover exactly and accurately what is happening now. * Writing for Mojo stories involves capturing visuals on a mobile phone, which may follow different cuts and editing methods. So, the script must be a clever interpretation of the visuals. In traditional storytelling, there is some liberty in choosing from the multi-cam set-up. * Mojo story writing allows you to write on various subjects on the spot. So, one must be well prepared with facts and details about the subject. * Mojo's story plays a vital role in covering extreme or crucial situations, such as natural calamities or other threatening or hazardous events. In such cases, the writing helps to assemble the footage containing various details recorded entirely on the spot. The writing also provides good transitions and effectively sums up the whole scenario.
2. The process of scripting is as follows: -
1) Choosing the Subject
2) Planning a story
3) Research for Writing
4) Visualizing the storyline
5) Writing the story draft
6) Writing the final story
7) Checking and revising.
Check Your Progress: 2
1. Two Do's and Don'ts of scripting are as follows: -
* Use authentic information from verified sources in your script. Today, a lot of information is freely available from multiple sources. Take time

Mobile Journalism and check your facts before penning them down in the script. Use official Production Process websites and know the concerned departments or people to get verified information on your subject. * Do extensive research to add credibility to your script. Look for primary and secondary sources of information to support your script. * Don't use offensive language or hurtful words. If the script is derogatory to the country, its culture, foreign relations, any religion, etc., it will be rejected, or you may face the consequences. Learn to write what must be said in a powerful yet respectful manner. * Don't repeat too many words. Overuse of particular words and phrases might make your script dull and monotonous. Check Your Progress: 3
1. Here are a few points to remember while writing a script: -
* There should be clarity in writing, or people may need to understand even a well-shot footage. * Script Writing should be in a talking form. It should not feel like a huge monologue or opinion expression. * If a sentence appears complicated for the general audience to understand, change it in your script and simplify it. Keep it easy and real. * When you write, be aware that you are not passing judgment or defaming someone. * If you have a choice between a long word and a short word when both mean the same, choose the short one with easy pronunciation.

UNIT 13 MOBILE NEWS PACKAGING
Structure
13.0 Introduction
13.1 Learning Outcomes
13.2 Mobile News
13.2.1 Short Content
13.2.2 Personalised Content
13.2.3 Live Streaming
13.2.4 Local News
13.2.5 Fact-Checking
13.2.6 Entertainment Content
13.3 Types of Mobile Media
13.3.1 Text Articles
13.3.2 Image-Based News
13.3.3 Video News
13.3.4 Audio News/Podcasting
13.3.5 Live Streaming
13.3.6 Social Media Content
13.4 Packaging Mobile Media
13.4.1 Packaging Text Articles
13.4.2 Packaging Image-Based News
13.4.3 Packaging Video News
13.4.4 Packaging Audio News/Podcasting
13.5 Smartphone for Mobile Media Packaging
13.5.1 Writing on Smartphones
13.5.2 Pictures and Audio/Video
13.5.3 Mobile Editing
13.5.4 Value Addition and Sharing
13.6 Future of Mobile News Media
13.7 Let us Sum up
13.8 Keywords
13.9 Further Readings
13.10 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers

13.0 INTRODUCTION
Production Process
The rise of mobile news technology has a greater impact on digital journalism. Mobile devices have become one of the important platforms for consuming and distributing journalistic content. In its survey of 50 countries, the Reuter Institute of Journalism found that 62% of the population consumes content on their mobile devices. If we look at the younger generation, in the age group 18 to 24, the percentage goes up to 92%. Due to this, we find various types of mobile content and tools have emerged, keeping mobile devices as a platform. The popularity of mobile devices gave rise to mobile journalism. It is a form of journalism where journalists do reporting and other necessary work through their smartphones. They create and file stories using their smartphones only. The implementation of tools and support in mobile news-reporting education is crucial. It helps grow media skills and know-how in mobile journalism. It is essential for the development of a platform and skilled human resources. The advancement of information and communication technologies (ICTs) has had a profound impact on digital media. New forms of digital journalism continue to emerge, requiring different skill sets and knowledge of using digital media. Mobile devices are adding to users' overall news consumption. Many users say that mobile is always accessible, so they consume information as and when they have time. There is also a trend of users getting news from new sources on their mobile devices. The rise of mobile news has opened up many opportunities for journalism, provided it is approached correctly. For journalists, this means adapting to the changing landscape by developing the necessary skills to produce and deliver content that meets the needs of mobile audiences.
13.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Learn small-screen storytelling by creating clear stories from complex information; * Learn to craft compelling headlines, utilise impactful visuals, and leverage multimedia elements like video and audio; * Understand learn how to package content for faster loading times, ensure readability on different screen sizes, and integrate seamlessly with social media platforms; * Know would learn techniques for using smartphones to capture high- quality video and audio for news stories; * Know how to tailor content to specific mobile audiences and platforms. This could involve utilising data analytics, understanding user preferences, and optimising content for maximum engagement; and * Explain the ethical considerations of news reporting and information dissemination in the digital age.

Mobile News Packaging
13.2 MOBILE NEWS
Mobile media has become the primary way of consuming news and informative content. In a Reuter Institute of Communication report, 72% of Indians consumed news and information through their smartphones, whereas only 35% of users consumed content on computers and laptops. This shift has led to changes in how content is produced and consumed. The following are the key trends in mobile media content:
13.2.1 Short Content
Recent trends suggest that people are more interested in consuming short content. Therefore, content producers focus on producing short articles, videos, and infographics. The popularity of YouTube shorts and Facebook reels strongly supports this trend.
13.2.2 Personalised Content
When we consume content on smartphones, we generally do it through news apps. These apps provide us with content and collect our watch history, search history, and interests. Based on this history, news producers create an algorithm to provide us with personalised content.
13.2.3 Live Streaming
As news content is consumed on smartphones, news organisations also include new ways to give their users a better experience. To provide breaking news, producers need not wait for visuals and images; instead, they go for live streaming on their platform. Now, users can experience real-time feeds through live streaming.
13.2.4 Local News
This is another area where mobile media is concentrated. One of the important elements which define news is proximity. People want to know about the events and incidents that occur in proximity. With mobile phones becoming one of the prominent tools for consuming news, content creators are coming up with apps that focus on local news only. Today, many apps provide content about a particular city or town.
13.2.5 Fact-Checking
This is one of the growing areas of news production. Mobile has filled the gap between news producers and consumers. Consumers also produce content through pictures, writeups, and videos. Many platforms, such as YouTube and Facebook, depend greatly on user-generated content. But when everybody is a content creator, there is always a problem of fake content circulated among users. To know whether a piece of content is fake or authentic, news organisations are developing platforms that provide fact-checking.
13.2.6 Entertainment Content
Mobile media and entertainment have become deeply intertwined in our daily lives. With the ubiquitous presence of smartphones and tablets, we can 219

Mobile Journalism access many entertainment options at our fingertips. India boasts a vibrant and Production Process growing entertainment industry and mobile media is crucial in distributing and consuming entertainment news. 72% of Indians consume entertainment news through smartphones, highlighting the dominance of mobile media. News aggregators like Daily Hunt, InShorts, and NewsPoint are extremely popular, offering curated content and short formats. Social media platforms like Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter are major entertainment news sources, with dedicated accounts and trending hashtags. Local and regional news apps cater to India's diverse linguistic and cultural landscape. Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How are smartphones useful in creating image and audio/video-based
content?

2. How are AR and VR-based content the future of mobile media?

13.3 TYPES OF MOBILE MEDIA
Mobile news can be presented in several formats, each with advantages and disadvantages. Here are some of the most common formats:
13.3.1 Text Articles
This is the most used news format for mobile. It should be simple and easy to read. Mobile text articles provide a concise overview of the news story. Mobile platforms should be created in a manner suitable for quick updates. Mobile users want to get updated and breaking news instantly. One disadvantage of this format is that text-based articles are limited in conveying complex information and need more visual appeal than other formats.
13.3.2 Image-Based News
Image-based news can be a series of images or a single image with important information. This kind of content is eye-catching and engaging. It conveys information quickly and efficiently. However, it might need more depth and details and is suitable for all news stories. This kind of content is usually light and gives general details of an event.
13.3.3 Video News
220 Video news is a multimedia presentation, which involves presenting news

through video footage, audio, and written content in one package. This kind of Mobile News Packaging content is highly engaging and informative. A resourceful source can produce this kind of content. News organisations with all the resources have a lead in generating this kind of content. The consumption of this kind of content requires high-speed internet; this is one of the limitations of this type of content.
13.3.4 Audio News/Podcasting
This is one of the fastest-growing mobile news types. People can listen to podcasts while doing other work, like driving or doing other work. This type of news is convenient for people interested in quality and in-depth analytical news. Podcasting requires focused users who have to focus intently to understand properly. This type of content is not suitable for all environments.
13.3.5 Live Streaming
Live streaming provides real-time updates. It is done by live streaming an event with live commentary. It allows users to witness events as they unfold. Live streaming has brought mobile media ahead of TV news because now mobile media can also provide breaking news like TV through live streaming with the added feature of an interactive news format, where comments and inputs can be added by users themselves.
13.3.6 Social Media Content
There are many social media platforms, and all the platforms have different formats for content sharing. For example, if you are sharing content on Facebook, then you have no word limit, whereas if you want to share something on X (formerly Twitter), you have to share it crisply, as there is a word limit of 240 characters. Similarly, if you share video content on Facebook, it has to be in landscape mode, whereas if you share content on Instagram, you have to shoot it in portrait mode. You should also have a portrait-mode video for Facebook reels and YouTube shorts. Facebook reels and YouTube shorts also require different kinds of content generation skills, where you have to be very concise and crisp and able to share the central idea of the content in a short video of 1 minute or less than 1 minute. Social media content fosters discussion and engagement, but at the same time, this medium is prone to misinformation and biased content. It would help if you were very careful about the news source.
13.4 PACKAGING MOBILE MEDIA
Packaging news content for mobile platforms involves optimising news articles' layout, design, and functionality to ensure they are easily readable and engaging on mobile devices. This includes using responsive design techniques, optimising images and videos for mobile viewing, and ensuring fast loading times. Responsive design means that your content gets optimised according to screen size. As mobile phones have different screen sizes, content should respond to screen size. It is also important to include various functionalities in news articles, such as sharing, commenting, or saving them to read later, even without an internet connection. These functionalities make your platform

Mobile Journalism more user-friendly and accessible. It is also important to look after the image
Production Process
resolution and video size. Heavy images and big video files sometimes slow down the page's loading. Make sure that you compress these files so that the page opens quickly. You can also leave it for users to select their preferred media resolution. They may select on their own according to a data plan.
13.4.1 Packaging Text Articles
Let us discuss some key points of packaging text articles:
I. Attention-grabbing headlines
In mobile news, it is important to write eye-grabbing headlines so that users tend to click the headline. To get clicks, craft clear and concise headlines. Headlines for mobile platforms should be short (60 characters). Sometimes, content creators use misleading headlines to get clicks, but it should be avoided as, in the long run, your platform will lose credibility. A bit of headline obscurity is accepted to get clicks, but that should not be manipulative. Your headlines should accurately reflect the article's content.
II. Scannability
Research suggests that on-screen users tend to read less; they want to scan the content to get an overview of the information. They only do in-depth reading on topics of their interest. Therefore, making your story scannable is key to the success of your mobile content. To do so, integrate the following things: a. Subheadings: Break down long texts with informative subheadings that guide readers through the content. b. Bulleted Points and Lists: Use bulleted points and numbered lists to highlight key points and improve readability on small screens. c. Inverted Pyramid Style: Keep crucial information upfront, followed by less important information. In news writing, there is an acceptable rule, which is an inverted pyramid. Follow the style which says that the most important information should be shared straight away in the first two paragraphs. d. Keep your content short: When writing for mobile platforms, aim for concise articles, ideally under 300 words. Users like to read quick, digestible content on the go. e. Simple Language: Use simple, easy-to-understand language. Do not use ornamental language, as it is common for users. Write in an active voice and avoid jargon. f. Multimedia Integration: Enhance your text with relevant images, infographics, or short videos. Visuals add context and improve reader engagement. g. Highlight Shareable Quotes: Include impactful quotes or sentences that readers can easily share on social media.
III. Optimisation

You need to optimise the font type, font size, theme colour, and platform design Mobile News Packaging as per the mobile interface. To do so, the following things need to be taken care of: a. Font Size and type for increased readability: Ensure a font type and size that's comfortable to read on a mobile screen. Some fonts look beautiful, but that might not be good for reading comfortably. The criteria for selecting fonts should always be readability. Font size should not be too small or too big; both are not good for readability. (Around 16px is a good starting point.) b. Whitespace: Use ample white space to avoid text density and create a visually clean reading experience. c. Mobile-Friendly Formatting: Optimise your content for various screen sizes and orientations. Consider using a responsive design or a content management system that handles mobile formatting automatically. d. Active reading: link relevant articles within your platform to keep readers engaged and exploring further. e. Offer an "Estimated Reading Time": This will inform readers about the time it will take to read the article. f. Read Aloud Functionality: This can improve accessibility and cater to readers who prefer audio consumption.
13.4.2 Packaging Image-Based News
There are several mobile platforms which provide content through images. Images are powerful tools for grabbing attention and conveying information quickly. One of the common formats to do so is creating photo essays. A photo essay is a collection of images placed in a specific order to tell the progression of events, emotions and concepts. A photo essay uses the same storytelling techniques as a normal essay and is translated into visual images. Instagram, Facebook stories, TikTok, and other platforms support photo-based content. The photo essay is a brilliant way to bring your images to life and touch your family, friends and people. Here's how to package image-based news for maximum impact on smartphones
I. Storytelling with Images
a. Find a topic: The first step to telling the story through images is to find a topic. Photo essays are most dynamic when you care about the subject as the content creator. Whether you choose to tell the story of the first month of a newborn in the family or a child in misery on the roadside, make your topic something in which you find interest. b. Do your research: If you portray a child's misery, spend some time on the spot. Try to find out their parents and what they do. Try to find out whether the child goes to school or not. Talk to the neighbours and find out some interesting facts about him. These factors will help you plan the shots you set up for your story. 223

Mobile Journalism c. Find the "real story": After your research, you can determine the Production Process angle from which you want to take your story. * Is the child malnourished? * Does the child possess some unique quality? * What kinds of games do he play? * How many times does he eat? d. Touch the heart of its audience: Every dynamic story is built on a set of core values and emotions that touch the heart of its audience. Anger, Joy, Fear, Hurt, and Excitement are all human emotions. Draw out the emotions within the story. It is not manipulation but a connecting point. e. Plan your shots: After following the above steps, you can think about the type of shots that will work best to tell the story. One should start with a shot list for the story. Each shot will work like a sentence for a one-paragraph story. You may start with ten shots, and each shot must focus on different concepts or emotions that can be woven together for the final draft of the story. f. Captions and Overlays: Enhance your visuals with concise captions that provide context and key details without overwhelming viewers. Consider using text overlays within the image itself for quick takeaways. g. Galleries: For longer visual stories, use image galleries, allowing users to swipe through images. h. Live Photos and GIFs: Leverage features like Live Photos (on iPhones) or short GIFs to add a sense of motion and dynamism to your visual content.
II. Captivating Visuals
a. High-Quality Images: Use high-resolution photos that look sharp and clear on smaller screens. Prioritise impactful images that capture the essence of the story. b. Eye-Catching Composition: Utilise strong composition techniques like leading lines and the rule of thirds to draw viewers into the image. c. Variety in Formats: Use photos of different formats like infographics and short video clips to keep content visually engaging and cater to different learning styles. Following these strategies can provide compelling image-based news experiences to users. Strong image-based stories and mobile-friendly content optimisation will make your platform popular among mobile users, and they will keep returning for more.
13.4.3 Packaging Video News
Videos are a powerful storytelling tool, and mobile offers a prime platform for

on-the-go news consumption. To create video content for mobile platforms, one Mobile News Packaging needs to understand some key features of this platform. Research proves that mobile users have limited attention spans; they don't tend to watch long videos, especially during working hours. In the early morning and late night, users watch long videos. Considering these facts, content creators focus on those "micro-moments" during working hours. Creating video content for mobile interfaces involves several key steps to ensure the videos are engaging and optimised for smaller screens.
I. Understand the basics
Video production is a multi-stage process. Whether making a film or creating video content for mobile platforms, you must understand the basics of video production, including pre-production, production, and post-production. a. Pre-production: This is the planning and preparation stage. At this stage, you brainstorm various ideas. As we discuss video content for mobile platforms, we must consider what works for shorter format videos. Further, after finalising the topic, we went into scriptwriting. The script provides an outline of the production, which includes dialogues and scene details. After these two steps, a storyboard is created, a visual representation of the script. At this stage, various camera shots and angles are finalised. b. Production: After pre-production, video content production starts. At this stage, shooting takes place. You must hire actors and complete the shooting if the script demands it. At this stage, sound recording of ambience sounds, dialogues, and sound effects is completed. c. Post-Production: After production, the last stage of video content is post-production. Video editors take all the raw footage and arrange it in sequence. If necessary, a voice-over is also given to elaborate the story. After all these stages, the final output is ready for users. II. Design for mobile After understanding the basics, the focus should be on the interface for creating content. As we are discussing creating video content for a mobile interface, we need to take care of certain things: a. Create short videos: Mobile users like to consume content on the go. Interfaces like Facebook reels, YouTube shorts, Instagram, and many other platforms are very popular among mobile users. These interfaces focus on providing content for those "micro-moments" when users want to consume content while waiting for a bus or metro or getting some time from work. Keep your videos concise and focused, ideally under 2 minutes. b. Impactful start: As a shorter video format, try to grab viewers' attention in the first two lines. Present the crux of the story early. Your content should have engaging visuals and sound. c. High-Quality Production: Maintain good audio and video quality, even if shot on smartphones. Use basic editing techniques for smooth

Mobile Journalism transitions and a polished look. Use visuals that complement the Production Process narrative, not just filler footage. Consider enhancing the story using a B-roll (supplemental footage) or creative camera angles. d. Clear and Concise Audio: Ensure clear audio with minimal background noise. Research also reveals that many users want to watch video content on mobile phones in silent mode. Consider using subtitles or captions for viewers watching in silent mode.
III. Optimising for Mobile Viewing
a. Vertical Video: As we know, the natural orientation of a mobile screen is portrait (vertical). Remember this when Shooting and editing videos in portrait (vertical) format. Go for landscape mode if you create video content for regular Facebook posts on walls or YouTube videos. But if you are creating content for Facebook reels, YouTube shorts, or Instagram, you must use portrait mode. b. Faster loading: Optimise video formats and file sizes for faster loading on mobile networks. Data-friendly options may be provided to users, allowing viewers to choose video quality based on their data plans.
IV. Engagement and Interactivity
Try to make your content more engaging and interactive. To do so, give users some options at the end of your videos, like sharing the story, subscribing for more content, or visiting your website for more videos. Apart from that, text can be used to describe the video, as users often watch content silently. Through text, highlight key points and provide additional context to the story. You can explore features like polls, quizzes, or interactive elements within the video player to increase audience engagement.
13.4.4 Packaging Audio News/Podcasting
Digital platforms have given impetus to a new form of content: podcasts. A podcast is audio content recorded and delivered to users through websites or mobile apps. In recent decades, podcasts have become very popular among users, and listening to podcasts is a normal routine. Pew Research Centre, in its report, says that about half of Americans listened to podcasts last year, and most of them came across news content. There are various kinds of news podcasts.
I. Types of News Podcasts
a. In-Depth Analysis: Podcasts offer more time than traditional news broadcasts. As internet-based content delivery, an issue can be discussed deeply through podcasts. This kind of programme is very popular among users. Research suggests that the majority of people find podcasts to be accurate. Pew Research Centre found that users trust the opinions shared through in-depth analysis. As podcasts offer more time, they provide a deeper understanding of complex stories, providing richer context and expert insights.

b. Diverse Perspectives: This news podcast feature differentiates it Mobile News Packaging from traditional news-sharing methods. When we listen to Radio, we have limited perspectives on the news. A podcast includes all the viewpoints related to an issue. These diverse perspectives give a clear picture of current events. c. IVR news: Many news organisations provide daily bulletins through Interactive Voice Recording (IVR). In IVR news, important news is recorded and shared with users. It can be done once or twice daily, depending on the users' demand. One of the benefits of IVR news is that it can be heard at any time. This is good for users who want concise updates on major headlines and for those who want a quick overview of current events. d. Interview: Interviews are a popular podcast format--people like listening to important personalities and getting an insight into their lifestyle. Now, podcasts are also being recorded and shared on video platforms to increase their visibility. Interviews with senior journalists, experts, policymakers, and political leaders will explore a specific topic in detail. e. Panel Discussions are also very popular among users. Organised panel discussions unite diverse voices on a single platform to debate current events and analyse complex issues from different angles. They provide various perspectives on an issue. f. News Satire and Commentary: Various research findings suggest that younger people listen to podcasts for entertainment. They love listening to light content while doing other important work or driving. This makes news satire and commentary an important format of podcasts. Humour and critical thinking provide an alternative perspective to the news.
II. Creating a News Podcast
a. Conceptualise podcast: It includes the focus of your news podcast. Will your podcast be a news bulletin or a specific issue? Will your podcast be a panel discussion or an interview? ConceptualisatioConceptualisationdentifying your ideal listener and tailoring your content to their interest and preferred formats. For Example, If your target audience is the younger generation, then the best-suited format would be satire or commentary, as young people are more interested in entertaining content. Choose a format that aligns with your goals. You may plan a news bulletin, panel discussion or interview. Ensure your content is informative, engaging, and well- sourced. A growing number of independent journalists and creators produce high-quality news podcasts on various topics. Podcasts can cater to specific interests, from politics and technology to science and healthcare, offering in-depth coverage for passionate audiences. b. Equipment for the podcast: Good podcasts include better audio quality. Invest in good microphones and editing software for professional production. Some popular podcasting microphones

Mobile Journalism include the Blue Yeti, Audio-Technica AT2020, and Shure SM7B. Production Process Use software to reduce ambient sound and improve audio quality. You can use Audacity or GarageBand to record and edit your episodes. For remote interviews, zoom or Skype can be used. Editing also removes mistakes when recording and inserting music and other audio elements. For editing, Adobe Audition is a good option. Free software like Audacity is also available. c. Promotion and Distribution: News organisations broadcast on websites or apps. However, if you create podcasts solely, you must distribute them through major directories like Apple, Spotify, and Google. It would help if you also considered monetising your comonetisinglore options like listener subscriptions, sponsorship, or partnership with news organisations. Prorganisationsur podcasts are equally important. Promote your podcasts through social media platforms. You may also create your websites or blogs to accompany your podcast.
13.5 SMARTPHONE FOR MOBILE MEDIA
PACKAGING
The mobile device is an indispensable tool in media content creation. It offers a suite of applications capable of performing a multitude of tasks. These compact powerhouses have features and applications that elevate storytelling to unprecedented levels.
13.5.1 Writing on Smartphones
Writing smartphone articles can be efficient with the right tools and practices. Mobile devices are capable of word processing and data editing. Microsoft offers mobile versions of Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, facilitating the creation and editing of text-based content directly on smartphones. Utilising audio techniques further expedites the content creation process. While writing on a mobile phone, one problem is distraction, such as getting a call or receiving notifications. To minimise these minimisers, you can use apps like Freedom, Focus Me, or Offtime to block distracting apps and notifications while writing. You should also not hesitate to use writing assistants. Tools like Grammarly can help you avoid casual language and ensure your writing is professional. If you want to use your smartphone for writing purposes, then you have to choose a smartphone that suits your writing needs. Some prefer a larger screen or physical keyboard to write long essays. For ease in writing, consider using a portable stand for your smartphone and an external keyboard for a better typing experience. If you feel uncomfortable typing on a small screen, take advantage of the voice-to-text feature of mobile phones.
13.5.2 Pictures and Audio/Video
228 Today's smartphones are capable of capturing high-resolution photos and

recording audio videos. Many news channels are dedicating some of their Mobile News Packaging news items to smartphones on which the story has been captured and edited. Several movies have also been shot entirely on smartphones to showcase their creative capabilities. Movies like Olive, 9 Rides, High Flying Birds, and many more are entirely shot on smartphones. a. High-Resolution Photography/Videography: Modern smartphones have high-resolution cameras capable of capturing high-resolution photos and videos. Now, creators can capture stunning visuals on the go without carrying bulky equipment. Mobile cameras offer a variety of shooting modes, filters, and effects, encouraging creative exploration. Creators can experiment with lighting conditions, angles, and built-in features to craft a unique visual narrative. b. Audio Recording: Smartphones have Integrated microphones, which enable content creators to capture clear audio for voice-over or ambient sound. These microphones can also be used for interviews. One can also attach external microphones for professional-grade audio recording. c. Contextual features: Mobile devices allow the capture of additional data. For example, geolocation tagging adds authenticity to the content, while weather data enriches stories related to environment or sports journalism.
13.5.3 Mobile Editing
Traditionally, video and photo editing is done on a desktop computer, for which specialised software is required. However, the rapid advancements in smartphone technology have also facilitated smartphone editing. Modern smartphones can capture high-resolution visuals and offer many editing tools at the user's fingertips. Smartphones have enabled users to produce high-quality content without bulky equipment or extensive technical knowledge. The accessibility and user-friendliness of mobile editing applications are fostering a new wave of content producers. These applications offer many features, making them suitable for novice and experienced content creators. Creators can edit their footage directly on smartphones and add music, sound effects, text overlays, and transitions. A variety of applications cater to different skill levels and editing needs. For Beginners, applications like InShot and Quik offer basic editing tools and templates, allowing users to create engaging media content quickly. Professional-grade applications like KineMaster and LumaFusion provide tools for expert editors who can use various editing parameters to create more professional content. Many mobile editing applications also use artificial intelligence (AI) to streamline editing. AI-powered features like automatic scene detection, smart trimming, and one-click filters allow users to achieve professional results with minimal effort.

Mobile Journalism 13.5.4 Value Addition and Sharing
Production Process
Through value addition like Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), we can create engaging experiences for mobile audiences. Mobile apps like Layar and Blippar unlock the potential of Augmented Reality (AR) storytelling. By integrating virtual elements into the physical environment, creators can offer interactive experiences that enhance user engagement. Platforms like Poll Everywhere allow creators to seamlessly integrate interactive elements like polls and quizzes within their content. This fosters a more participatory experience and boosts audience engagement. Mobile devices also provide instant access to various social media platforms, enabling creators to share their content directly with their target audience. Each platform caters to a specific user demographic, allowing creators to choose the most suitable platform based on format and style. Mobile-centric storytelling platforms like Spryto and Krock are also available and designed to create mobile content. These platforms integrate interactive elements, cater to diverse narrative styles, and provide targeted distribution options.
13.6 FUTURE OF MOBILE NEWS MEDIA
The field of Mobile media-based journalism is constantly expanding, and it is expected that it will continue to grow in the future. Mobile has been made to create content and share it with the users. It is also expected that constantly changing audience preferences and rapidly evolving new media technology have the potential to tap new audiences and provide a more immersive experience for readers and viewers. Let us discuss some emerging trends in mobile news media:
1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Virtual Reality (VR)
AR and VR-based stories promote immersive storytelling, allowing users to experience news events firsthand. AR and VR-based news could redefine news consumption and audience interactivity with the content. These kinds of content are particularly important for complex and remote stories for which real footage is unavailable. AI-powered news generation can also provide personalised news or even produce original news articles. While ethical concerns like accuracy and bias remain, they can give opportunities for the production of tailored content. AI-powered algorithms can also personalise new content, tailoring it according to individuals' interests. This raises concerns about filter bubbles and echo chambers, but at the same time, it provides opportunities for promoting diversity of viewpoints.
2. Interactive and Participatory content
A new trend in mobile media content is more user interactivity and participation in content generation. There has been a rise in interactivity-based content, where users contribute to content creation through polls, quizzes, and discussions. Content creators run quizzes and discussions on specific topics to increase

interactivity. There are various app-based platforms which enable journalists Mobile News Packaging to do this very conveniently. Based on the inputs received from users, content is created. These contents give a sense of community and allow diverse perspectives on an issue.
3. Targeting niche community
Mobile users are very interested in knowing about the incidents and events in their immediate surroundings. This user preference has added a new trend in content generation for mobile users. Now, hyper-local news platforms are on the rise. These platforms provide news and events in users' immediate surroundings. This new trend has strengthened the growing demand for localised content and also strengthened community connections. It is also supported by the increasing popularity of niche social media communities based on specific news topics or interests. Local area-based social media communities are also on the rise. Content creators are also targeting these niche communities for content generation. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. How can smartphones be used for word and data processing?

2. Enumerate the role of AI and AR in the future of mobile computing?

13.7 LET US SUM UP
In this unit, we learned about various trends and types of mobile news. These include text articles, image-based news, video news, and podcasting. We have also learnt how to create all these mobile media formats. We also learned about various software available for news writing and creating image-based and video content. Considering the short attention spans of mobile users, we also tried to understand how to create short content that provides information crisply. Mobile is undoubtedly becoming a content-sharing platform as consumers use their mobile devices to consume content. Keeping this in mind, we tried to understand the future of mobile news media. We understood various new trends that will shape mobile content formats. Mobile news media offers a powerful and convenient way to stay informed. Users can leverage this platform to stay dynamically and informatively engaged with current events by understanding its consumption trends, content formats, and future possibilities. 231

13.8 KEYWORDS
Production Process
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is used for gathering, storing, transmitting, and manipulating information. Mobile journalism: Creating and sharing news content using mobile devices. Mobile storytelling: Crafting narratives designed explicitly for consumption on mobile devices. News podcasts: Audio programs deliver news and information in an on- demand format. Infographics: Visual representations of data or information using charts, graphs, and illustrations. News apps: Mobile applications designed to deliver news content to users. Live streaming: Broadcasting video and audio content in real-time over the internet. Artificial intelligence (AI): Simulating human intelligence in machines for tasks like learning and problem-solving. Augmented reality (AR): Superimposing computer-generated images on a user's real-world view. Virtual Reality (VR) creates an immersive computer-generated environment that simulates a user's physical presence.
13.9 FURTHER READING
1. Adornato, A. (2021). Mobile and social media journalism: a practical guide
for multimedia journalism. Routledge.
2. Burum, I., & Quinn, S. (2015). MOJO: The mobile journalism handbook:
How to make broadcast videos with an iPhone or iPad. Routledge.
3. Duffy, A., Ling, R., Kim, N., Tandoc Jr, E., & Westlund, O. (Eds.), (2020),
Mobile News: Journalism's Shift from Fixed to Fluid. Routledge.
4. Westlund, O., & Quinn, S. (2018). Mobile journalism and MoJos. In Oxford
research encyclopaedia of communication.
13.10 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. Today's smartphones are capable of capturing high-resolution photos and
recording audio videos. Many news channels are dedicating some of their news items to smartphones on which the story has been captured and edited. Several movies have also been shot entirely on smartphones to showcase their creative capabilities. Movies like Olive, 9 Rides, High Flying Birds, and many more are entirely shot on smartphones.

High-Resolution Photography/Videography: Modern smartphones have high- Mobile News Packaging resolution cameras capable of capturing high-resolution photos and videos. Now, creators can capture stunning visuals on the go without carrying bulky equipment. Mobile cameras offer a variety of shooting modes, filters, and effects, encouraging creative exploration. Creators can experiment with lighting conditions, angles, and built-in features to craft a unique visual narrative. Audio Recording: Smartphones have Integrated microphones, which enable content creators to capture clear audio for voice-over or ambient sound. These microphones can also be used for interviews. One can also attach external microphones for professional-grade audio recording. Contextual features: Mobile devices allow the capture of additional data. For example, geolocation tagging adds authenticity to the content, while weather data enriches stories related to environment or sports journalism.
2. AR and VR-based stories promote immersive storytelling, allowing users
to experience news events firsthand. AR and VR-based news could redefine news consumption and audience interactivity with the content. These kinds of content are particularly important for complex and remote stories for which real footage is unavailable. AI-powered news generation can also provide personalised news or even produce original news articles. While ethical concerns like accuracy and bias remain, they can give opportunities for the production of tailored content. AI-powered algorithms can also be used to personalise new content. AI can tailor the content according to individuals' interests. This raises concerns about filter bubbles and echo chambers, but at the same time, it provides opportunities for promoting diversity of viewpoints. Check Your Progress: 2
1. Writing smartphone articles can be quite efficient with the right tools
and practices. Mobile devices are capable of word processing and data editing. Microsoft offers mobile versions of Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, facilitating the creation and editing of text-based content directly on smartphones. Utilising audio techniques further expedites the content creation process. While writing on a mobile phone, one problem is distraction, such as getting a call or receiving notifications. To minimise these minimisers, you can use apps like Freedom, Focus Me, or Offtime to block distracting apps and notifications while writing. You should also not hesitate to use writing assistants. Tools like Grammarly can help you avoid casual language and ensure your writing is professional. If you want to use your smartphone for writing purposes, then you have to choose a smartphone that suits your writing needs. Some prefer a larger screen or physical keyboard to write long essays. For ease in writing, consider using a portable stand for your smartphone and an external keyboard for a better typing experience. If you feel uncomfortable typing on a small screen, take advantage of the voice-to-text feature of mobile phones.

Mobile Journalism 2. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Augmented Reality (AR) will significantly Production Process shape the future of mobile computing. AI will enhance user experiences by personalising interactions and learning from user behaviour, while also automating tasks and optimising app performance. Advanced security measures, such as biometric authentication and real-time threat detection, will be bolstered by AI, ensuring safer mobile experiences. AR will revolutionise interfaces, offering immersive and interactive applications across various fields like gaming, education, healthcare, and retail. Furthermore, AI will enable seamless integration with the Internet of Things (IoT), creating smarter and more connected ecosystems. Together, AI and AR will transform mobile computing, making it more intelligent, interactive, and integral to our daily lives.

UNIT 14 MOBILE EDITING AND
PRODUCTION
Structure
14.0 Introduction
14.1 Learning Outcomes
14.2 Need for Mobile Editing
14.3 Mobile Editing Workflow
14.3.1 Editing Plan
14.3.2 Types of Edits
14.4 Mobile Editing Applications for Video and Audio
14.5 Post-Production
14.5.1 Post-Production Apps
14.5.2 Export and Share
14.6 Let Us Sum Up
14.7 Keywords
14.8 Further Readings
14.9 Check Your Progress: Possible Answers
14.0 INTRODUCTION
As mobile journalism has become very popular, mojo reporters need to acquire the requisite skills for mobile editing and production. With technological advancements, a journalist with a smartphone can shoot, edit, and share stories on the go with unprecedented speed and ease. Mastering editing videos on one's smartphone is imperative for a mobile journalist today. A skilful reporter understands the capabilities of the device at hand, a smartphone or tablet, and possesses the necessary skill set to make the most of it. While smartphone cameras nowadays are quite advanced and have features to help you capture great footage, they also have built-in functions to help you with editing and post-production. A mobile journalist should get familiar with the functionalities of the smartphone or tablet and explore the wide array of apps that fulfil the purpose. Whether video or audio, numerous ways exist to create impressive mojo stories.
14.1 LEARNING OUTCOMES
After reading this unit, you should be able to : * Understand the basics of mobile editing; * Understand the structure and flow of a mojo story;

Mobile Journalism * Edit news story on a smartphone; and
Production Process
* Know the apps for mojo editing and post-production.
14.2 NEED FOR MOBILE EDITING
While previous units have focused on how to write and shoot a mojo story, this Unit deals with the next step in the process, which involves editing and arranging the different elements thoughtfully to make an intelligible news package. There may be several ways to edit the video on a smartphone or tablet. Using a tablet may provide a bit of leverage as the bigger screen makes things less cumbersome yet does not hinder your mobility. Smartphones offer advanced features that make the move possible in a way akin to carrying a complete newsroom in your hand. As a journalist, mobile has made your work far easier and convenient. The editing needs may vary according to your story and platform. However, for any news story, the basic editing steps are more or less common, including trimming clips, adding transitions, effects, and filters to enhance the visual style and mood, incorporating graphics, text, and captions to provide context and information; and adding music, sound effects, and voice-overs to enrich the audio and convey emotion. Moreover, several other editing tools like crop, rotate, split-screen, freeze, lower thirds, watermark, etc., help improve the editing results.
14.3 MOBILE EDITING WORKFLOW
With a large spectrum of apps available for editing stories on mobile, you may believe that the gadget or the app is the dominant factor in compelling a story. However, notwithstanding the features of your gadget or the latest app in the market, smartphone editing is more about storytelling technique and understanding the perspective. You need to have a clear vision of the structure and flow of the story. Mobile devices with Android or iOS operating systems allow you to create B-roll smoothly, interview bites, record audio, add music and overlays, add transitions, text and graphics, and easily render and disseminate your stories instantaneously. While a journalist may capture great visuals and record amazing footage of an event, the story may have little to offer without careful editing and sequencing of shots. Poor editing is very likely to ruin an otherwise great story. Thus, a mobile journalist must set the right pace, tone, and flow of information in the story.
14.3.1 Editing Plan
It would help if you had a mental plan about the sequencing of a story right from the beginning. That would aid in the structure, which you would later flesh up with essential, appropriate information. While it may seem that editing a news story begins only after the shots have been captured, experts argue that the key to creating a great story is planning right from the inception of the idea in your mind. Even before stepping into the field, a rough sketch of your needed 236 content is ideal.

Robinson (2019) states that good story editing results from careful field Mobile Editing and preparation. The reporter should focus on the overall presentation, an interesting Production beginning and end, substantial content in the body and maintain a logical structure. As per Ivo Burum, the veteran mobile journalist, the story planning should follow a 'SCRAP' story development tool: * Story -- what is it, why am I telling it, and who is the audience? * Character -- who are the interviewees, and how will I use them in the edit? * Resolution -- what is the structure, and where will it take the story? * Actuality -- what actuality will I record, and what other elements will I need in the edit? * Production -- what are the logistics for filming and the editing? It is in sync with the five Ws of news reporting. By asking yourself these questions, you can decide the course of the story, evaluate what shots are available, what information is missing, and how the shots may be utilized in the best possible way. * To create an engaging story, a great idea is to think like the audience. The questions they might ask, the information they may want, and the order of the questions would help you decide on the story structure. It is recommended to start the edit with the most compelling elements in your arsenal. Use the best b-roll, actualities, natural sound-on-tape, music, and voice-over, and make optimum use of your strongest content. * The Story Cut: As Ivo Burum suggests, using two video tracks, V1 and V2, is advisable. This makes cutting the story on the first track (V1) easier and allows you to add a B-roll on the second track (V2). The process is more flexible as you can easily add and vary your B-roll wherever required. This way, your focus remains on the story, not the B-roll, as you work with the actualities and interview bites. The two tracks also enable an early edit of the B-roll, thus helping you make a fine cut as you move on. Burum advises going for checkerboard editing, where a checkerboard acts as a blueprint for the editing sequence. The image above shows how using a separate track (V2) for B-roll is preferable as it allows quick working with B-rolls, which may be a bit cumbersome if they are all edited on a single track (V1). You can also notice that the wide shot in the figure above can be extended or shortened in a single step, overlapping

Mobile Journalism the piece-to-camera or the interview. If you insert the wide shot into the gap Production Process between PTC1 and the interview, extending it would be more difficult as you also have to detach the audio of the PTC and interview. The second audio layer (A2) could either be left blank, or some music could be added here. L-cuts (where audio from one shot continues to the next) and J-cuts (where audio of the next shot begins before the shot changes) are also viable here as they give a more dynamic feel to the video. B-rolls and interview bites are edited in tandem. Often, B-rolls cover elements like an unwanted zoom or a whip pan and break the monotony of a long bite. They may be used judiciously to add perspective to what is being said or provide additional information. A B-roll can easily expand or compress a sequence. Take note of what the interviewee is talking about during the bite. Consider adding the visuals (read B-roll) after the bite starts, for example, after 10 seconds. You may show the B-roll for 10-15 seconds and return to the bite. The B-roll should contain visuals corresponding to the information being given in the interview. The cutting back and forth between the B-roll and bite will make the entire sequence more appealing. Ivo Burum suggests the following checkerboard for such editing of the B-roll: Voice-over is the next essential element of a news story. Writing and recording audio in Mojo usually happens on location. The narration can be recorded using an external microphone attached to your device or the camera app. The best idea to make your edits faster while you are on the move is to record narration as a video with audio. Take pertinent visuals (B-roll) or cover the camera lens with one hand and record the voice-over. This will make the clip appear black in your folder, and you won't find it difficult to locate your audio among the video clips. Also, you will have all your video and audio clips in the same folder, so you don't have to rummage through different locations on your smartphone to find them. You may not need a separate audio app to record your narration. Some experts say that recording on the in-built mic of an iPhone produces as good results as a professional mic. However, when locations are noisy, or the source cannot be approached close enough, this may not work. Natural sound-on-tape (natural location audio) is crucial for any story as it can be easily layered under a B-roll and aid in smooth transitions in the audio while editing. It is advisable to remember to record some location sounds.

* Fine Tuning: Ivo Burum suggests that the above process will give you a Mobile Editing and rough cut of your story. Once the B-roll is all set, you may produce the Production fine cut. The first thing is to look at your story again and note what you think needs some change at each crucial point of the story, right from the beginning to the middle to the end. After watching, you must decide to prune the edges of the shots (start or end). This trimming is required to remove any dead air after someone stops talking. Check on the placement and length of the B-roll at each point wherever it is used. Check whether you want to extend, shorten, or slide it across the timeline to achieve an impact. Also, narration can be reviewed for clarity, pace, or choice of words. If required, do not shy away from re-recording the voice-over. When making editing decisions, you must constantly ask yourself questions about where, why, and how to place the cut. A transition or cut should only be made where you have a valid reason. Always try to cut on. Do not wait for an action to be completed entirely. This keeps the story dynamic. Also, you must be courageous to dump those shots that add little or no value to your story. No matter if you took a shot with great effort, do not hesitate to remove it if it is only dragging the story and not contributing meaningfully. After all this is done, you are ready with the broadcast version of your story.
14.3.2 Types of Edits
While editing your stories in Mojo mostly requires the simple cut or fade as a transition, it is also pertinent to know that a variety of edits exist that can be utilised in the process:
1. Montage: A montage (a French term meaning 'assembling shots') involves
joining a series of shots to make a continuous sequence. The successive shots may be either completely in contrast or similar. The shots are usually quick-paced (fast-cutting) and short, demonstrating visual variety and giving the video a vibrant touch.
2. Jump Cut: A jump cut is a transition that looks like a technical mistake if
not placed meaningfully. Removing some frames from a continuous shot can achieve a jump cut. This gives the impression of the subject instantly jumping forward in time. It is often shown to depict the passage of time. The shot composition and camera angle are usually the same, with only slightly changing the subject's position. Jump cuts are also often utilised to create high-energy montages. They may also convey psychological state or emotional disturbance.
3. L-Cut: An L-cut is one where the previous shot's sound overlaps the next
shot's video. The editing timeline appears to be in the shape of an L. That's why it is called L-cut. An L-cut may be used to suggest the thoughts of a subject, flashbacks, voice-over montages, one-on-one dialogue scenes, or the ending of a story.
4. J-Cut: A J-cut is one where the sound from the next shot starts before the
video of the next shot appears. The editing timeline appears to be in the shape of a J. That's why it is called J-cut. These can be used to make the

Mobile Journalism dialogue flow more natural or to create intrigue in the viewer's mind about Production Process what is coming next. Sometimes, they can be used as an opening shot of a story. A J-cut is also used to make the sound/audio more significant by making it detached from the video.
5. Cutting on action: Editors often cut the shot at a point when the action is
mid-way. The reason is to make the resulting sequence look more active and paced-up. Waiting for an action to be complete would result in a rather unappealing sequence. The editing is done to match the action in one shot to that in the next one--for example, a mid-shot of a man moving his hand towards the door knob to open it. Then, there is a close shot of the hand turning the doorknob, followed by a full shot of the man entering a room.
6. Parallel Editing: When two (or more) actions unfolding simultaneously
are intercut, it is parallel editing. Also called cross-cutting, this technique involves cutting back and forth between two elements in the same story, giving the sense of two different things happening simultaneously.
7. Matched Cut: A cut where two completely different shots are joined to
match each other in look or style. The two shots may be matched using similar objects, actions, colours, shapes, or dialogue. Such transition creatively augments the meaning of the sequence, creating a seamless storyline. One of the most popular examples is Hitchcock's depiction of water swirling down the drain in the movie Psycho, which is matched with the murdered girl's eye. It creates a link between life draining out of the girl's body and the bloody water flowing into the shower drain.
Name Device OS Free Version Paid Features
Subscription Adobe Premier Android Free basic Adobe Rush Auto duck music, Rush and iOS version Premium pro cloud sync, in-built templates KineMaster Android Free basic Paid Premium Transitions, effects, and iOS version with version audio, multi-layered watermark editing PowerDirector Android Free basic Paid version for Supports 4K, Motion and iOS version the latest features tracking, several editorial tools Filmora Android Free basic Paid Premium Variety of edit tools and iOS version with version and stock library watermark Funimate Android Free basic Paid PRO version Creative animation Video Editor and iOS version with and special effects watermark Quik Android Free basic Paid premium Powerful editing tools, and iOS version version automatic edit Splice Android Free basic Paid premium Supports 4K, powerful and iOS version version editing and animation Viva Video Android Free basic Paid premium Wide range of editing and iOS version with version features yet simple watermark InShot Android Free basic Paid premium Professional basic and iOS version with version video editing features watermark

Mobile Editing and
Magisto Android Free basic Paid premium Uses advanced AI to Production and iOS version with version create professional watermark videos Luma Fusion Android Free basic Paid premium Powerful editing tools and iOS version with version and effects watermark VN Android Free basic In-app purchases Advanced Editor with and iOS version with rich text templates no watermark iMovie iOS only Free A wide array of powerful editing tools Check Your Progress: 1 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss the SCRAP tool for planning your mojo story.

2. Differentiate between L-cut and J-cut.

14.4 MOBILE EDITING APPLICATIONS FOR
VIDEO AND AUDIO
Smartphones have shrunk the recording studios to fit in our back pockets. Mojo work relies a lot on a wide range of apps, from recording to editing and sharing your work. Tech markets are abuzz with numerous apps suitable for journalists practising Mojo and creating stories in a flash. Some of the popular video editing apps trending among mobile journalists are listed below: Audio editing apps: It is vital to edit the audio in your story, whether it is an interview, sound bite, ambient sound, voice-over, or simply any other music. You must trim the beginning and end of interviews and other distractions and noise that you must fix. Some popular audio editing apps, both free and paid, have been listed below:
1. Wave Editor
2. Wondershare Filmora
3. Audio Lab
4. WavePad
5. Voice PRO

Mobile Journalism 6. Audio Evolution Mobile Studio
Production Process
7. FL Studio
8. Adobe Podcast
9. Dolby On
14.5 POST-PRODUCTION
Post-production is significant because it provides the final finishing touch to your video. The storyline you created through your shots and audio needs further touch-ups to complete and seal the edges. That's where post-production comes in. The video may need some colour correction somewhere, or you may want to give additional information through graphics or text. As a journalist, you may file or publish the story with simple edits without much polishing in mojo work. However, if time allows, you may refine by adding supers to identify interviewees, data, figures, or even subtitles.
14.5.1 Post-Production Apps
For post-production, numerous options are available with different apps, rendering you a beautifully packaged story. Some of the popular ones are listed below:
1. Adobe Premiere Rush: This app offers a wonderful editing workspace
for smartphone editing. In addition to trimming clips, arranging shots in great sequences, and adding narration and music, you may add transition graphics, insert titles, and overlays. You can add a new transition graphic clip or an overlay to your timeline at the playhead's location. You can also adjust colour and speed, add music saved on your device, or choose from the app's soundtracks, sound effects, and loops. You can quickly create a picture-in-picture with Premiere Rush with three simple steps for news stories. First, select a base video on track V1. Then, select the second video and stack it on the second track, V2 (on top of track V1). Adjust its size (shrink it to a small picture in one corner) and place it wherever you want. Premiere Rush allows editing four video layers, V1 to V4, and three audio layers, A1-A3, in one go. However, in Mojo, you often use two video layers and one or two audio layers. You may use the Audio tool to increase or decrease the volume of your audio file and customize other audio adjustments. Adding text is also effortless in Rush, something you can achieve in a few easy clicks. The Edit panel allows you to customize the text the way you want. The title panel also has several customizable pre-built templates. You can add your desired animation to the title as well.
2. Luma Fusion: The paid subscription comes with 'Storyblocks for
LumaFusion', a media library offering a repository of royalty-free videos, animated backgrounds, music and sound effects.

Another feature that makes this app a favourite among users is the ability to edit Mobile Editing and multiple video and audio tracks simultaneously. Up to 6 videos and six audio Production tracks supporting 4 K videos can be edited. However, roughly two videos and two audio tracks are generally sufficient for journalistic work. Text can be easily added to videos in various ways. A text clip or title can be chosen and added by dragging and dropping it on the video track. Further, it can be customised using the presets and templates available to create a fancier look. Double-tapping the text clip allows you to change settings like opacity, font, size, etc. Luma Fusion allows you to insert a shot or clip anywhere into your timeline and replace shots or their parts. Adding transitions with professional finesse is also quite straightforward. It is a great tool for a mojo reporter who has to accomplish his task in the least possible time. Colour corrections are also easy to achieve. Simply double-clicking a clip, you can enter the Editor, which gives you access to 'Color and Effects'. The 'Green Screen' effect can achieve the chroma key function. Once a key value is set, the image on the track below the timeline will show wherever that value is present in the selected image. Key effects can be applied before or after other colours and effects. Different effects can be combined and applied to videos, photos, and titles. The best part is that a quick fix can be made at the story assembly stage if needed. Luma Fusion offers a powerful tool for live audio mixing that is very handy for mobile journalists. Audio ducking allows the music or other soundtrack to be automatically lowered when a source gives a bite on a separate audio track. Frame and Fit Editor can create picture-in-picture (PnP), ideal for mojo stories.
3. I Movie: A sturdy app for smartphone editing, iMovie is usually pre-
installed on almost all Apple devices. It is one of the favourite apps among mojo practitioners. In addition to basic editing, this app offers features for post-production to polish your news stories. Adding and editing the B-roll is smooth with this app. The main video clip is added to the first track, and the plus icon is selected to add the B-roll immediately. Locating your desired footage (B-roll), tap it, and you will get some options, from which you click the three dots and select cutaway. This will stack your B-roll above the main track, and you can edit it further, expand it, or compress it as needed. iMovie also offers Picture in Picture (PinP), which places one clip over and anywhere on the main track. A split-screen effect can also be used when adding a clip of an interviewee. As the source talks with the reporter, the screen can show the reporter and the source side-by-side. The reporter/source can also be shown along with the B-roll. In such cases, split-screen is a good tool. For the chroma key, select the desired clip and click Add media. From the pop- up, choose the green screen clip. Tap three dots and select green/blue screen, followed by Auto. This will remove the background and replace it with a

Mobile Journalism background of your choice. The background clip's length can be trimmed and Production Process adjusted to match your main clip. The app enables four audio and music tracks--the video clip's audio track -- to be edited, mixed, or split. The video-embedded track can also be detached using the 'detach' option.
4. Filmora Wondershare: Filmora is user-friendly and suitable for mojo
work, as you can instantly film, edit and share your stories. Text and titles can be added by dragging and dropping directly on the timeline. While you can vary the duration of text visibility on your video clip, you may also add various effects to the title. The Text editing panel lets you change your text's font, size, alignment, colour, and settings. Advanced text editing helps you add more elements to your title effects. Filmora Split Screen video tool can help you show differently angled shots side- by-side and make comparisons, which is very useful for news videos. You can use the Split Screen preset, which involves importing clips to your library and dragging them to the preview window. Further, colour corrections, animations, and other adjustments can also be made to each video on the split screen.
14.5.2 Export and Share
The final step in the editing process is exporting the video. This step is significant as it determines how the video will finally be viewed and shared. Export in video editing means converting an edited video into a format that enables it to be watched on different platforms and devices. It involves compressing the video size, encoding it to a specific format such as MP4, MOV, Mkv, AVI, etc., and then saving it to a chosen location. The video quality, compatibility, and size depend on the export settings selected. Different apps allow users to export edited videos in various formats, resolutions, and frame rates. The intended platform for the video to be shared is a crucial factor in deciding the settings. A video meant for digital platforms may have a different format from the one designed for broadcast television. For example, on Filmora Wondershare, you can either export and save the video on your device or share it directly on various social media platforms in a few steps. After you complete your editing, tap the Export option. The Export Settings will be prompted. Choose the desired resolution and FPS (frames per second) and tap Continue Export. The export process may take some time, and the video will be saved directly to the phone's gallery. The app will allow you to share it on various social media platforms, which you can choose accordingly. Similarly, videos can be exported and shared through various editing apps. For instance, Adobe Premiere Rush renders your video in the export settings you choose and saves it in the location of your choice. You may also choose Advanced Settings to meet any specific requirements.

You can also directly sign into your social media accounts like YouTube, Mobile Editing and Facebook, Instagram, or others through Premiere Rush and pitch your stories Production immediately. Check Your Progress: 2 Note: 1) Use the space provided below for your answers.
2) Compare your answers with those given at the end of this unit.
1. Discuss how the iMovie app can achieve the chroma key effect.

2. Explain what is meant by exporting a video.

3. List some video file formats used in Mojo.

14.6 LET US SUM UP
In this Unit, we discussed the concept of mobile editing and production used by mobile journalists, as smartphones have emerged as complete newsrooms in themselves. We discussed how a mojo plans a news story, from the idea's conception to its final production. We learned how to create the first edit of a story, which leads to the fine cut and placement of shots and audio. We also discussed various editing apps used for editing and post-production and how to export and share stories on various platforms.
14.7 KEYWORDS
B-roll refers to the shots that support the main storyline. The supplemental footage shot outside the primary footage (A-roll) can cover transitions, set the tone, break monotony, or mask errors. Actuality refers to the live or recorded information from a scene or a bite on location. It could be an interview of a source who may provide key information about the news story. A watermark is a type of symbol, logo, or visible overlay on a video that marks the ownership or brand of the tool used to create that work. These are usually

Mobile Journalism semi-transparent and superimposed onto a piece of work, usually appearing in Production Process the foreground of a video. Premium is an app that must be purchased before being used. Such versions unlock the full potential of software that is not available on free or basic versions.
14.8 FURTHER READINGS
1. Burum, I., & Quinn, S. (2016). MOJO: The Mobile Journalism Handbook.
Routledge.
2. Burum, I. (2021). The Mojo Handbook Theory to Praxis. Routledge.
3. Horrocks, S. (November 10, 2018). 5 Best Editing Apps for Android
Phones. Retrieved February 10, 2024, from https://momofilmfest.com/ editing-apps-for-android-phones/
4. Horrocks, S. (November 10, 2018). 5 Best Editing Apps for iPhone.
Retrieved February 10, 2024, from https://momofilmfest.com/best-editing- apps-for-iphone/
5. Joseph, S. M. (July 26, 2023). How to write, shoot and edit a film on
mobile. Retrieved February 10, 2024 from https://www.videomaker. com/how-to/planning/organization/how-to-write-shoot-and-edit-a-film- on-mobile/#:~:text=Doing%20basic%20edits%20on%20your,app%20 like%20Filmora%20Video%20Editor.
6. Montgomery, R. (2020). Mobile Journalism. Independently Published.
14.9 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS: POSSIBLE
ANSWERS
Check Your Progress: 1
1. The SCRAP tool comprises the following questions:
* Story -- what is it, why am I telling it, and who is the audience? * Character -- who are the interviewees, and how will I use them in the edit? * Resolution -- what is the structure, and where will it take the story? * Actuality -- what actuality will I record, and what other elements will I need in the edit? * Production -- what are the logistics for filming and the editing?
2. An L-cut is one where the previous shot's sound overlaps the next shot's
video. A J-cut is one where the sound from the next shot starts before the video of the next shot appears. Check Your Progress: 2
1. For the chroma key, select the desired clip and click Add Media. From the
pop-up, choose the green screen clip. Tap three dots and select green/blue screen, followed by Auto. This will remove the background and replace it with a background of your choice. The background clip's length can be 246 trimmed and adjusted to match your main clip.

2. The final step in the editing process is exporting the video, which determines Mobile Editing and
how it will be viewed and shared. In video editing, export means converting Production an edited video into a format that enables it to be watched on different platforms and devices.
3. Different video file formats are MOV, Mkv, MP4, FLV, and AVI.